.TH mmforward ""
.SH NAME
mmforward - re-assemble multi-part messages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.HP
\fB| /usr/local/mm/mmforward |\fR 
.HP
\fB/usr/local/mm/mmsavepart\ \fIfile id partnum totalnum\fR
..
.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
The
.I mmforward
script takes a message on 
.I stdin.
It looks in the headers to see if the message is a MIME
message with the content type 
.I message/partial.
If it does find one the message is simply sent to 
.I stdout.
.P
If a message/partial message is found 
.I metamail 
is called to process the message.
.P
.I Metamail
will usually in turn call 
.I mmsavepart
to first reassemble the message and eventually when all
of the parts are received to forward a new message to the
user containing an external reference to the message.
..
The
.I mmsavepart
program will squirrel away the body of a MIME-format message that is of type 
"message/partial" for later use.  
When it is called on the last piece
the resulting message is
saved into a file and a message with a content type of
.I message/external-message
is sent to the user.
..
Mmsavepart is 
intended to be called by metamail via a mailcap entry like the following
in 
.I /usr/local/lib/mm/fwd.mailcap:
.nf
        message/partial; \
	    /usr/local/lib/mm/mmsavepart %s %{id} %{number} %{total}
.fi
.P
..
To use mmforward place something like the following
in your 
.I .forward
file:
.nf
	| /usr/local/lib/mm/mmforward | filter 
.fi
.P
There are several programs that can handle the mailbox delivery. 
For example
.I filter
from the ELM mail package. 
The
.I deliver 
program
or 
.I procmail
will also work.
..
.SH SEE ALSO
filter(1), metamail(1), mmshowpart(1), splitmail(1)
.SH BUGS
The parts are squirrelled away on /tmp, which means that /tmp can fill up 
if you never get the remaining parts.  When the message is finally displayed, 
via metamail, the parts are all discarded, which might also be seen as a bug 
by some...
.SH COPYRIGHT
.SH AUTHOR
Stuart Lynne 
.br
Adapated from showpart(1) by Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
