.TH mmsend 1 ""
.SH NAME
mmsend - simple front end to metamail
.br
mmsendsh - interactive front end to metamail
.SH SYNOPSIS
.HP
\fBmmsend\fR
[\fB-b][\fB-s\ \fIsubject\fR]
[\fB-c\ \fIcc\fR]
[\fB-e\ \fIencoding\fR]
[\fB-m\ \fIMIME-type\fR]
[\fB-x\ \fR]
[\fB-X\ \fR]
[\fB-f\ \fIfilename\fR]
[\fB-S\ \fIsplitsize\fR]
[\fB-z\fR]
\fIaddress\fR
..
.HP
\fBmmsendsh\fR
[\fB-b][\fB-s\ \fIsubject\fR]
[\fB-c\ \fIcc\fR]
[\fB-e\ \fIencoding\fR]
[\fB-m\ \fIMIME-type\fR]
[\fB-x\ \fR]
[\fB-X\ \fR]
[\fB-f\ \fIfilename\fR]
[\fB-S\ \fIsplitsize\fR]
[\fB-z\fR]
\fIaddress\fR
...
..
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I mmsend
program will allow a user to send files via metamail.
.P
The mmsendsh script program will interact with the user to
get information and then call
.I mmsend.
.SS OPTIONS
Alternately, all of this information can be provided on the comand line, 
using the following options:
.RS 5
are all required.
.IP "-c cc"
Set a cc address.
.IP "-e encoding"
Set the encoding type.
.IP "-m MIME-type"
Set the MIME content type.
.IP "-f filename"
Specify a filename. 
It is an error to specify a file before a MIME content type has
been specified.
.IP "-s subject"
Set the subject.
.IP "-S splitsize"
Set the maximum message size.
.IP "-X"
Send the file specified as an external body part.
.IP "-x"
Cancel -X.
.IP "-z"
Remove the temporary files even if delivery fails.
.IP "addresses ..."
Set the destination addresses.
.RE
.P
Multiple instances of the 
.I "-e, -m, -x, -X"
and
.I "-f"
options can be given. Each file is sent with the most recently specified
encoding and MIME content type specified.
..
.P
mmsend is intended largely calling from other programs in batch mode.
A much friendlier interface to non-text mail is provided by mailto(1).
.P
The mail will be delivered using the splitmail(1) program, 
so if long it will arrive as several pieces which can 
be automatically reassembled by metamail.  
The definition of "long" can be altered using the 
-S flag or the SPLITSIZE environment variable, 
as described in the splitmail(1) man page.
.SH SEE ALSO
mailto(1), metamail(1), mmencode(1), splitmail(1)
.SH BUGS
Should do a better job of choosing the encoding if you don't specify one.  
.SH COPYRIGHT
.SH AUTHOR
By Stuart Lynne
.br
Adapted from metasend(1) by Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
