.TH PCOMM 1 local
.SH NAME
pcomm \- a telecommunication program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pcomm
[
.B \-d
directory ] [
.B \-f
system name
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Pcomm
is a public domain telecommunication program for Unix that is designed
to operate similar to the MSDOS program, ProComm.  ProComm (TM) is
copyrighted by Datastorm Technologies, Inc.
.PP
The
.I \-d
option is used to specify an additional path to search for the Pcomm
support files.
.PP
The
.I \-f
option is used to specify automatic dialing of an entry in the dialing
directory.  The
.I name
field in the dialing directory is checked against the string given on
the command line.  If a match is found, that entry is automatically
dialed.
.PP
Whenever
.I Pcomm
is in the command mode, a status line is displayed at the bottom of the
screen.  The eight fields of the status line are:
.PP
.RS 5
.nf
\(bu help screen command (or a temporary message)
\(bu name of the TTY device in use
\(bu duplex mode (FDX = full duplex, HDX = half duplex)
\(bu current line settings
\(bu status of data logging option
\(bu status of printer logging option
\(bu incoming CR translation
\(bu outgoing CR translation
.fi
.RE
.SH COMMANDS
The following commands are accessible by pressing a user definable ``hot
key'' followed by a letter, number, or arrow key.  The default ``hot
key'' is control-A.  The notation ``^A-X'' means control-A followed by
the letter X.  The dash (-) is for clarity, and is not a part of the
command sequence.
.TP
.B ^A-0
Help Screen.  Display a brief review of the available commands.  Uses
the number zero ``0'' not the letter ``O''.
.TP
.B ^A-D
Dialing Directory.  The dialing directory screen is used to display and
maintain the database of phone number entries, and to select an entry
for dialing.  To dial an entry, just enter the entry number at the
prompt.  If the ``script'' field contains valid Unix shell script, that
file is used to automatically log the user on to the remote system.  See
the Pcomm Reference Manual for the format and use of the script files.
The following commands are available from the dialing directory:
.RS 5
.TP
.B R
Revise (or add) a dialing directory entry or a long distance dialing
code.
.TP
.B P
Print (display) the long distance dialing codes.
.TP
.B up/down
Scroll the dialing directory up or down 10 lines.  Uses the up and down
arrow keys.
.TP
.B M
Manual dial.  Prompts for a phone number rather than using a number
already in the dialing directory.
.TP
.B D
Delete an entry or a range of entries.
.TP
.B L
Print.  Send the dialing directory to the printer or a file of your
choice.
.RE
.TP
.B ^A-R
Automatic redial of selected dialing directory entries.  Prompts the
user for a list of directory entries to be placed in the queue.
.I Pcomm
will dial the numbers in a cycle until one of them answers.
.TP
.B ^A-M
Allows the user to maintain a list of keyboard macros assigned to the
shifted number keys.  When pressed, the string assigned to that key is
sent to the remote system.
.TP
.B ^A-P
Adjust the current communication line settings.  Display a menu of baud
rate, parity, data bit, and stop bit choices.  Allows the new choice to
be saved and become the default.  After dialing a remote, the line
settings in the dialing directory entry are automatically used.  The
current line settings are shown in the status line.
.TP
.B ^A-X
Exit from
.I Pcomm.
.TP
.B ^A-4
Spawn a Unix shell while still communicating with the remote system.
Uses the ``native'' shell as described in the SHELL environmental
variable.
.TP
.B ^A-I
Display the program information screen.
.TP
.B ^A-S
Display a choice of setup screens.  The following sub-menus are
available:
.RS 5
.TP
.B 1
TTY Setup.  This setup assigns the TTY ports that
.I Pcomm
is allowed to use, and what is attached to each port.
.TP
.B 2
Modem Setup.  The modem setup contains the commands to make the modem
dial, hang up the phone, etc.
.TP
.B 3
Terminal Setup.  The terminal setup contains the definition of the ``hot
key'' and the mapping of the end-of-line characters.
.TP
.B 4
General Setup.  The general setup contains the default log file name,
and the set of character synonyms.
.TP
.B 5
ASCII Transfer Setup.  This setup screen contains additional character
translations allowed during ASCII file transfers.
.TP
.B 6
External Protocol Setup.  This setup screen allows the user to imbed the
names of external file transfer programs into the list of available
protocols.
.TP
.B S
Save the changes to disk.
.RE
.TP
.B ^A-B
Change the current working directory.
.TP
.B ^A-C
Clear the local screen and home the cursor.
.TP
.B ^A-E
Toggle the duplex mode from full to half, or from half to full.  The
status line shows the current duplex mode.
.TP
.B ^A-H
Hang up the phone.  Disconnect the phone, but remain in
.I Pcomm.
.TP
.B ^A-L
Toggle the printer on and off.  Since the printer is accessed through
the normal Unix spool program, the output is not sent to the printer
until
.B after
this feature is turned off.
.TP
.B ^A-3
Toggle the incoming line termination characters between the carriage
return and the carriage return line feed pair.  This affects the
terminal session only, not the file transfers.  The current settings are
shown in the status line.
.TP
.B ^A-7
Send a modem break.  This is
.B not
the same as the break key on the keyboard.
.TP
.B ^A-up
Display a menu of file transfer protocols to be used to send files to a
remote system.  Uses the up arrow key.
.TP
.B ^A-down
Display file transfer protocols to be used to receive files from a
remote system.  Uses the down arrow key.
.TP
.B ^A-F
Display the contents of a Unix directory.
.TP
.B ^A-G
Dump the contents of the screen to a specified file.  Special graphics
characters may not be represented accurately in the file.
.TP
.B ^A-1
Begin data logging.  Prompts the user for the name of the file that will
be used to collect a complete record of the terminal session.
.TP
.B ^A-2
Toggle the data logging option without prompting for a new file name.
The status line shows the current data logging mode.
.SH "FILE TRANSFERS"
.I Pcomm
understands the following file transfer protocols:
.PP
.RS 5
.nf
.if n .ta 1.5i +1.5i +1.5i +1.5i +1.5i
.if t .ta 1i +1i +1i +1i +1i
protocol	packet	error	multiple
name	size	method	files?
---------	--------	------------	--------
xmodem	128	checksum/CRC	no
xmodem-1k	128/1024	checksum/CRC	no
modem7	128	checksum	yes
ymodem	128/1024	CRC	yes
ymodem-g	128/1024	none	yes
ASCII	none	none	no
zmodem	128/1024	CRC	yes
(external)	?	?	?
.fi
.RE
.PP
.I Pcomm
can use an external program, such as Kermit or a proprietary program, to
transfer files.  Commonly used external programs (such as zmodem in the
example above) can have their names imbedded into the list of available
protocols.
.PP
.SH CONFIGURATION
.I Pcomm
must have access to the terminfo or termcap data for the terminal being
used.  The minimum capabilities include a screen size of at least 80
columns by 24 lines and cursor movement capabilities.  Running
.I Pcomm
from terminals at relatively slow speeds (i.e. 1200 baud) will cause
the windows to appear sluggish.
.PP
Terminals that don't have arrow keys or systems without the newer
versions of curses(3) will require the user to substitute the letter ``U''
for ``up arrow'' and ``N'' for ``down arrow''.
.PP
There are four Pcomm support files that contain the dialing directory,
the external file transfer programs, the modem/TTY database, and the
start-up default parameters.  Users may maintain private versions of
these files in a directory of their choice.
.I Pcomm
also uses normal Unix shell scripts to perform the ``chat'' sequences
necessary to automatically log a user onto a remote system.
.I Pcomm
uses the environmental variable PCOMM to search for the ``private''
support file and the auto-login shell scripts.  The following directories
are searched to find the files:
.PP
.RS 5
.nf
\(bu directory given with the \fI\-d\fP option
\(bu directory in the PCOMM environmental variable
\(bu current directory
\(bu default directory (compiled into Pcomm)
.fi
.RE
.PP
The ``script'' field in the dialing directory serves two purposes.  The
first use is to identify the shell script to use for auto-login.  The
second use is to specify a TTY name for a given entry.  If the
``script'' is a valid device name, that device is used instead of
searching the TTY database for a free port.
.SH FILES
.nf
pcomm.dial_dir          the dialing directory
pcomm.extrnl            the external file transfer programs
pcomm.modem             the modem/TTY database
pcomm.param             the start-up default parameters
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Pcomm Reference Manual, xmodem(1), mdm(1)
