.\" @(#)othello.1 1.4 90/04/09
.TH OTHELLO 6 "9 April 1990"
.SH NAME
othello \- an othello game.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "othello
[
.B -d
.I display
]
[
.B -g
.I geometry
]
[
.B -i
]
[
.B -r
.I remarksfile
]
[
.B -v
]
[
.B \-Wi
]
[
.B \-Wp
.I x y
]
[
.B \-WP
.I x y
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Othello
is a version of the popular Othello game. It contains graphical interfaces
for SunView, X11 and XView, as well as being able to function on
normal display terminals using a termcap interface.
.LP
Othello is played on an 8 x 8 board, with pieces which are black on one side
and white on the other. A legal move consists of placing a piece of one's own
color on the board so as to "sandwich" a row (orthogonal or diagonal)
of pieces of the opposite color between the piece just placed and
another piece of the same color. All pieces so sandwiched are flipped
over to reveal the color of the other side.
.LP
The object of the game, is to have more pieces than the opponent at
the end of the game (ie. when the board is full or neither side has
a legal move). If you have no legal move, you simply miss a turn.
White goes first.
.LP
With
.I othello,
to place one of your own pieces simply click with the mouse over the
square in which you want your piece to go. Note that it is also possible
to supply a number and a letter pair, to indicate where you would like your
new piece to go. This is the only method to place pieces with the dumb tty
interface.
.LP
There are various buttons and cyclic selections available. Their meanings
are given below, plus an indication of their keyboard equivalents. With the
cyclic selections, clicking over the left half of the cycle icon increments
the selection, and clicking over the right half of the cycle icon decrements
the selection. With the SunView and XView version, it is also possible to
make a seclection from a popup menu using the right mouse button.
.SH OTHELLO BUTTONS
.LP
With the graphics versions, there are six buttons that are displayed at the
top of the Othello window. Each of these buttons, except the "done" button
has one or more keyboard equivalents which are given in brackets below.
.LP
.IP "\fBdone [ No keyboard equivalent]\fP" 18
Change \fIothello\fP to an icon.
.IP "\fBlast [l or L]\fP" 18
Show the last move played by the computer.
.IP "\fBnew game [n or N]\fP" 18
Start a new game of
.I othello
.IP "\fBsuggest [s or S]\fP" 18
Let the computer suggest a good move for you.
.IP "\fBundo [u or U]\fP" 18
Undo the last two moves, yours and the computers.
.IP "\fBquit [q or Q]\fP" 18
Exit the
.I othello
program.
.SH OTHELLO CYCLIC SELECTIONS
With the graphics versions, just below the six buttons are four cycle icons.
These can either be selected with the left mouse button, to increment or
decrement the current selection (depending upon which half on the icon
you click over), or a selection can be made from a popup menu when you
click with the right mouse button (SunView and XView versions only).
Each cycle value has a keyboard equivalent which is given in brackets below.
This must be followed by the value of the new selection you wish to make.
The dumb tty version has the equivalent of these buttons displayed to the
right of the othello board display.
.LP
.IP "\fBAspiration [ A ]\fP" 18
Sets the degree of aspiration for the computers moves. Keyboard selection
values are in the range '1' to '6'.
.IP "\fBDifficulty [ D ]\fP" 18
Sets the degree of difficulty for the computers moves. Keyboard selection
values are in the range '1' to '4'.
.IP "\fBComputer plays [ C ]\fP" 18
Selects whether the computer plays black, or white pieces. Keyboard selection
values are 'b' for black, and 'w' for white.
.IP "\fBRemarks [ r or R ]\fP" 18
Toggles whether the computer makes remarks. Keyboard selections values
are 'y' or 'n'.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-d " display"
Used with the X11 variant of
.I othello
to give a display type.
.TP
.BI \-g " geometry"
Used with the X11 variant of
.I othello
to give geometry information.
.TP
.B \-i
Invert the othello window before displaying it. For use by people who
started their graphics environment in inverse mode.
.TP
.BI \-r " remarksfile"
Use an alternate remarks file. By default,
.I othello
will initially look for the remarks file using the name supplied
when the program was built. If this is not found, then it searches
every directory on your search path. This option is also provided
as an alternative at run time.
.TP
.B \-v
Print the version number of this release of the
.I othello
program.
.TP
.B \-Wi
Start the
.I othello
program up in iconic form. SunView automatically uses this flag, but the
NeWS version will also.
.TP
.BI \-Wp " x y"
Start the open window position at
.I x y
.TP
.BI \-WP " x y"
Start the icon position at
.I x y
.SH FILES
.TP
/usr/local/lib/othello.remarks
.SH BUGS
See the TODO file for the list of known problems.
.SH AUTHOR
Rich Burridge,        Domain: richb@Aus.Sun.COM
.br
PHONE: +61 2 413 2666   Path: {uunet,mcvax,ukc}!munnari!sunaus.oz!richb
.br
Original SunView graphics implementation by Ed Falk, Sun Microsystems, CA.
.br
Computer playing strategy and remarks code by Chris Miller.
