.ig
 @(#)man/man1/uuwho.an	1.5 11/3/91 01:54:52
..
.TH UUWHO X_MAN1_EXT_X
.SH NAME
uuwho \- show map entry for a site
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B uuwho
[
.B \-r
] [
.B \-d 
.I dbmfile
]
[
.I sitename
] ...
.br
.B uuwho
.B \-i 
[
.B \-d 
.I dbmfile
]
.I "mapfile ..."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Uuwho
without the
.B \-i
option extracts the map entry for each given
.I sitename.
The output provides labels for the site entry and includes all the
connection information as determined by the UUCP mapping project.
By default, uuwho extracts a map for the local site where
the local sitename is determined in a system dependent fashion. 
.TP
.B \-i
If the option
.B \-i 
is given, then map info will be added to a
.IR dbm (3X)-style
database, rather than printing info about a site.  This information is
then available for use by subsequent
.I uuwho
commands.
.TP
\fB\-d\fP \fIdbmfile\fP
This option specifies the basename for a
.I dbm
database is to be used for this operation.
If
.I dbmfile
begins with a ``/'' or ``.'', then it is taken to be the actual
database name, otherwise it is assumed to be a file under the
directory
.I X_LIB_DIR_X.
If the
.B \-d
option is not given, then \fIdbmfile\fP defaults to
.ie !'X_UUWHO_FILE_X'' \fIX_UUWHO_FILE_X\fP.
.el \fIX_LIB_DIR_X/uuwho\fP.
.TP
.B \-r
If the option
.B \-r
is given, then raw map entries are printed.  Without this option,
recognized #letter lines are listed in a more symbolic form.
.PP
Each
.I mapfile
file is scanned for lines of the form:
.RS
.nf

\fB#N\fP \fIsitename\fP
\fB#N\fP \fIsitename1\fP, \fIsitename2\fP, ...

.fi
.RE
indicating that a new map is starting.  In the second form, each
.I sitename
is considered to belong to the map that follows.  Sitenames listed on
such lines become the
.I sitename
keywords which are available for subsequent requests.
.PP
A
.I mapfile
of 
.B \-
indicates that a map should be read from standard input.
Lines of the form:
.RS
.nf

.B file { filename }

.fi
.RE
indicate that the line following should be considered as
if it were the first line of the stated file.
.SH EXAMPLES
uuwho walldrug hoptoad
.br
uuwho -d other_dbm
.br
find X_UNSHAR_MAP_DIR_X -name '[ud].*' -print |
.br
while read file; do
.in +10
	echo "file { $file }"
.br
	cat $file
.in -10
done | uuwho \-i \-
.SH FILES
.TP 1.5i
.IR dbmfile.pag ", " dbmfile.dir
The two parts of a dbm database, when the DBM library is used to
store the database.  The
.I .pag
file contains the keys and data associated with the database, while the
.I .dir
file contains information that affects the hashing algorithm used to
determine which block contains a particular value.
.TP 1.5i
.ie !'X_UUWHO_FILE_X'' \fIX_UUWHO_FILE_X\fP
.el \fIX_LIB_DIR_X/uuwho\fP
The basename for the default
.I dbm
database files.  If the DBM library is not used, then this is the name
used to store the default database, as a sorted file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR pathto (X_MAN1_EXT_X),
.IR dbm (3X),
and
.IR pathalias (X_MAN8_EXT_X).
.SH BUGS
If a site has more than one map entry only the latter entry is shown.
.PP
The information available for a site may not be current.
.PP
Only sites marked via
.B #N
in the map database are listed.  Normally, sites listed under a domain
will not be marked using
.BR #N .
In this case the domain, including the dot but excluding the machine
name must be used.
