.TH XMAKE5 6  "28 November 1991"
.SH NAME
xmake5 \- the game of 5-in-a-row
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xmake5
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Make5
is a game similar to Tic-Tac-Toe.
It is called Wu3-Zi3-Qi2 in Chinese and is 
very popular in the Far East.
5-in-a-row and Go-Moku are the other names
for this game.
You may also find it called "Chess" 
on some Nitendo game cartridges.
I call it Make5 because the goal of this game
is to make five continuous stones in a line.
.LP
This game was originally played by two players
on a board of infinite size.  Each player puts
a stone at one empty cross-point at a time.  
The winner is the one who first puts five
continuous stones in a line, vertically, 
horizontally, or diagonally.
.LP
However, this program plays the game on a finite
board the same size as a GO game board, which has
19 by 19 cross-points.
.I The only tricky rule 
.I is that you must make
.I exactly five continuous 
.I stones in a line to win.  
.I Six or more stones in
.I a line do not count.
.LP
Some people play this game with a rule which
prohibits the first player to make double-3 or 
double-4 attacking patterns.  But I do not
like this rule and did not include it in this 
program.
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
This program can play with you or play with itself.  
You can also play with your friends and use this
program to update the board.
Most of the options in the "Setup..." menu can be
changed in the middle of a game.  Hence, you can
switch the players, change the computer's searching
level, or even undo your moves.
The "Where..." menu provides hints for good
positions and the position of the last move.
.LP
You can switch to the challenge mode, in which
the computer always moves first and you can not
undo, change play level or order, or get suggestions
from the computer.  If you beat the computer, your
name would be added into the list of winners.
.LP
Have fun!

.SH BUGS
.nf
Please send bugs to "hsiehch@cs.nyu.edu".
.LP
This program does not have any learning ability.  
You could use the same strategy to beat it again and again.
.fi
.sp
.SH AUTHOR
Chih-Hung Hsieh
.sp
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cmake5 \- a simplified version that runs on ASCII terminals.

