.\" @(#)man/man8/mkline.an	1.3 8/2/92 03:32:40
.TH MKLINE X_MAN8_EXT_X "31 January 1988" "Local"
.SH NAME
mkline \- fold an alias file, paths file or mailing list into one-line records
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B X_UTIL_BIN_DIR_X/mkline
.RB "[ " \-ltn " ]"
.RI "[ " file " ...  ]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Mkline
takes alias files, path files or mailing list files as input and
produces output records containing one complete entry per line with
all comments and whitespace replaced by zero or one spaces.
One space is used if the concatenation of two tokens would otherwise
cause ambiguity.
For mailing lists, the
.B \-l
flag should be specified and the output will be a list of addresses.
Otherwise, the input is assumed to be alias files or path files and
the output is single line entries, with the key always separated from
the data by a single colon character (``:'').
.PP
If no input files are specified, the standard input is read.  In
addition, if a filename of
.B \-
is given, the standard input is inserted at that point.
.PP
If the
.B \-t
flag is specified, then an ASCII
.I TAB
character separates key from data, rather than a colon character.
.PP
If the
.B \-n
flag is specified, then keys are not extracted from the input, so that
all tokens pass through unchanged, with comments and whitespace still
being reduced to the minimum required for unambiguous tokens.
.PP
The
.B \-t
and
.B \-n
flags have no effect when processing mailing lists.
.SH EXAMPLES
If the file
.I aliases
contains:
.PP
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'UUCP-Postmaster:'u+2n \w'Wilt . (the Stilt) Chamberlain@NBA.US:'u+2n
Postmaster:	hustead		# Ted Hustead, jr.
UUCP-Postmasters:	tron, chongo	# namei contacts
	yamato	# kremvax contact
tron:	tron@namei.uucp (Ronald S. Karr)
yamato:	yamato@kremvax.ussr.comm (Yamato T. Yankelovich)
chongo:	chongo@eek.uts.amdahl.com (Landon Curt Noll)
.DT
.fi
.RE
.PP
then the command
.I mkline aliases
will produce:
.PP
.RS
.nf
Postmaster:hustead
UUCP-Postmasters:tron,chongo yamato
tron:tron@namei.uucp
yamato:yamato@kremvax.ussr.comm
chongo:chongo@eek.uts.amdahl.com
.fi
.RE
.PP
As an example of using
.I mkline
to compress mailing lists, consider the mailing list:
.PP
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'Wilt . (the Stilt) Chamberlain@NBA.US:'u+2n
tron@namei.uucp,tron@uts.amdahl.com	# Ronald S. Karr
yamato@kremvax.ussr.comm	# Yamato T. Yankelovich
chongo@eek.uts.amdahl.com	# Landon Curt Noll
Wilt . (the Stilt) Chamberlain@NBA.US	# RFC822 doc example
.DT
.fi
.RE
.ne 5.8v
.PP
The command
.I "mkline -l"
applied to this list will produce:
.PP
.RS
.nf
tron@namei.uucp
tron@uts.amdahl.com
yamato@kremvax.ussr.comm
chongo@eek.uts.amdahl.com
Wilt.Chamberlain@NBA.US
.fi
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR mksort (X_MAN8_EXT_X),
.IR mkdbm (X_MAN8_EXT_X),
.IR smail (X_MAN5_EXT_X),
.IR smail (X_MAN8_EXT_X),
.IR pathalias (X_MAN8_EXT_X).
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright(C)1987, 1988 Ronald S. Karr and Landon Curt Noll
.br
Copyright(C)1992 Ronald S. Karr
.br
See a file COPYING,
distributed with the source code,
or type
.I "smail -bc"
for distribution rights and restrictions
associated with this software.
