.\" @(#)man/man8/smail.an	1.8 8/2/92 03:27:19
.de pP
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .4
..
.TH SMAIL X_MAN8_EXT_X "31 January 1988" "Local"
.SH NAME
smail, sendmail, mailq, runq, rmail, rsmtp, smtpd, newaliases \- mail delivery system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smail
.RI "[ " flags " ] " address ...
.br
.B "X_SMAIL_NAME_X"
.RI "[ " flags " ] " address " ..."
.br
.B mailq
.br
.B runq
.br
.B rmail
.I address ...
.br
.B rsmtp
.br
.B smtpd
.br
.B newaliases
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Smail
is a program used for receiving and delivering mail.
Its job is to take mail from sources on the local or
on remote hosts and deliver to the appropriate destinations.
This may be
either on remote hosts or on the local machine.
It is not intended to be a user interface for reading and
submitting mail.
See
.IR mailx (1)
on System V,
.IR Mail (1)
on BSD
systems,
or
.IR mail (1)
on other systems
for information on user interfaces.
.PP
Smail is invoked under a wide variety of names,
which serve to isolate some of its major uses:
receiving local mail,
receiving remote mail,
attempting delivery of undelivered mail
and displaying information about undelivered mail.
.SH OPTIONS
All of these commands accept the same set of flags,
differing mainly in their default
mode of operation.
Two exceptions are the
.I rmail
and
.I rsmtp
commands which support only a subset
of the possible flags.
These two commands are intended to be
used from remote hosts through remote execution over UUCP
(see
.IR uux (1))
and are thus limited in how much they can do.
.PP
The flags which are recognized by smail are:
.TP
.B \-bc
Display the file
.IR COPYING ,
distributed with the source,
which details your rights and restrictions
for distributing this software.
.TP
.B \-bd
Listen for connection requests on a socket bound in
the internet domain.
When a connection occurs,
conduct an SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol)
conversation with the peer process.
Listening will only occur
if BSD style internet networking functionality is available.
.TP
.B \-bm
Deliver mail to the recipient addresses.
This is the default mode of operation if invoked as
.IR sendmail ,
.IR smail ,
.I rmail
or
.IR send-mail .
.TP
.B \-bp
List information about the messages currently in
smail's input spool directories.
This is the default mode of operation if invoked as
.IR mailq .
With the
.B \-v
or
.B \-d
flag, a per-message transaction log is displayed for each message
which shows what has happened to the message so far.
.TP
.B \-bi
Initialize the aliases file, or a YP aliases file.  The specific
behavior of this command depends upon whether an aliases file is
specified in the command with \fB\-oA\fP \fIfile\fP.  If such an
aliases file is specified, the file specifies input that will be used
to build a DBM database with the same basename.  The resulting DBM
database is intended to be usable as a YP database.  If smail was
compiled with the \fBsdbm\fP package, distributed with smail, then the
resulting database will \fInot\fP be usable by YP.  The DBM database
is rebuilt by calling \fBmkdbm\fP (see
.IR mkdbm (X_MAN8_EXT_X))
with the \fB\-y\fP option.
.IP
If an aliases file was not specified with \fB\-oA\fP, then the system
default aliases file is rebuilt by calling the \fBmkaliases\fP program
(see
.IR mkaliases (X_MAN8_EXT_X)
for more information).
.IP
Both the \fBmkdbm\fP and \fBmkaliases\fP programs are executed from
the directory indicated by the \fBsmail_util_dir\fP attribute (by
default \fIX_UTIL_BIN_DIR_X\fP).
.TP
.B \-bP
Take the addresses given on the command line as
.I config
file variables
(see
.IR smail (X_MAN5_EXT_X)
for more information)
and write the values for each variable on the standard output.
References to variables,
such as
.I hostnames
or
.I uucp_name
which may be computed at run time,
will yield the values that smail would compute
normally.
For example, on my workstation,
the command:
.pP
.in +.5i
smail -bP hostnames max_message_size
.in -.5i
.pP
produces the output:
.pP
.in +.5i
futatsu.uts.amdahl.com:futatsu.amdahl.com
102400
.in -.5i
.pP
With the
.B \-v
or
.B \-d
flag the variable names are displayed as well, so that the command:
.pP
.in +.5i
smail -bP -v max_message_size
.in -.5i
.pP
produces the output:
.pP
.in +.5i
max_message_size=102400
.in -.5i
.pP
In addition to other config file variables, the name
.I primary_name
will output the primary (or canonical) name for the local host which will
be used by smail, and
.I config_file
will output the name of the primary configuration file.
Also, the name
.I help
will produce a verbose listing of all variables associated with their
type, one variable per line, and the name
.I all
will produce a verbose listing of all variables along with their values.
It is equivalent to
.I "smail -bP -v"
followed by a list of the names of all configuration variables.
.TP
.B \-bR
Enter the hostile mail domain of giant mail messages,
and RFC standard scrolls.
Attempt to make it down to protocol level 26 and back.
.TP
.B \-bS
Read SMTP commands on standard input,
but do not produce SMTP replies on standard output.
All failures are reported by return mail,
rather than through reply codes.
This is suitable for setting up a
batched form of SMTP between machines over a remote execution
service like
UUCP.
This is the default mode of operation if invoked as
.IR rsmtp .
.TP
.B \-bs
Read SMTP
commands on standard input
and produce SMTP replies on standard output.
The currently implemented SMTP commands are
.BR "HELO" ,
.BR "MAIL FROM" ,
.BR "RCPT TO" ,
.BR "DATA" ,
.BR "RSET" ,
.BR "NOOP" ,
.BR "VRFY" ,
.BR "EXPN"
and
.BR "QUIT" .
This is the default mode of operation if
invoked as
.IR smtpd .
For compatibility with some implementations of
.IR inetd (8N),
if
.I smtpd
is started with no standard output,
standard input will be
.IR dup (2)'d
to standard output.
.TP
.B \-bt
Enter address test mode.
Read addresses on standard input
and produce the parse results and
host routing/resolving information
on standard output.
This is primarily useful for debugging
smail or debugging new smail routers.
.TP
.B \-bv
Verify a list of addresses by producing
the list of addresses produced by aliasing and forwarding
expansions and by host routing or resolving.
Addresses which cannot be resolved are also displayed,
along with the reasons why.
.TP
\fB\-C\fP \fIfilename\fP or \fB-oC\fP \fIfilename\fP
Sets the pathname of the primary config file to use in reading
global attribute values.  If specified, then smail
sets the effective uid and gid back to the real uid
and gid,
to avoid problems when
installations allow smail
to be set uid to the superuser.
If the filename is
.B \-
then no primary config file is read.
This should only be used for debugging purposes.
.TP
\fB\-d\fP\fI[number]\fP or \fB\-v\fP\fI[number]\fP
turn on debugging.  If a number is given, set the
debugging level to that value, otherwise the debugging
level is set to 1.
No white space is allowed before the optional number.
There is no differentiation between use of
.B \-d
and
.BR \-v .
.TP
\fB\-D\fP \fIfile\fP
Redirect debugging output to the indicated file.  Normally, debugging
output will disable background delivery because programs should not
continue to write to standard error after the mail process exits.
However, if a debug output file is specified, then background delivery
can occur.
.TP
\fB\-em\fP or \fB\-oem\fP
Mail errors back to the sender (default).
.TP
\fB\-ee\fP or \fB\-oee\fP
These forms refer to a berkenet error processing
style which is not supported.
If used, errors will be mailed back to the sender.
.TP
\fB\-ep\fP or \fB\-oep\fP
Write errors to the standard error output.
.TP
\fB\-eq\fP or \fB\-oeq\fP
Do not send notification of errors to the sender.
This only works for mail delivered locally.  Errors encountered
on remote hosts mail still result in returned mail.
Supply a
.B "Precedence: junk"
header field to set this behavior on local
.I and
remote hosts.
.TP
\fB\-ew\fP or \fB\-oew\fP
Write errors to the sender's terminal using the
.IR write (1)
command, if he is logged in.  Otherwise, mail errors
back to the sender.  (This is currently not supported and
is treated in the same manner as
.IR \-oem )
.TP
\fB\-F\fP \fIfullname\fP
Explicitly set the full name of the sender for incoming mail,
used only if the operation mode is reception of a single mail message
on standard input.
.TP
\fB\-f\fP \fIsender\fP or \fB\-r\fP \fIsender\fP
Explicitly set the sender address for incoming mail,
used only if the operation mode is reception of a single mail message
on standard input.
.TP
.BI \-h " number"
Sets the
.I hopcount
for a single message.
If this is not specified,
the hop count is computed from the number of
.B Received:
fields in the message header.
The hopcount is used for a primitive form of infinite
loop detection:
a sufficiently large hop count
will cause mail to be rejected.
.TP
\fB\-I\fP or \fB\-oI\fP
Use the hidden dot algorithm in reading the message.
Lines with one or more dots at the beginning have the
leading dot removed, while a line containing only a
single dot ends the input message.
This is always set for messages received using
SMTP.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP or \fB\-oi\fP
Do not allow a single `.' to end an incoming message.
Otherwise, a dot on a line by itself will end a message.
This is the default if smail is invoked as
.IR rmail .
.TP
\fB\-m\fP or \fB\-om\fI
Allow retention of the sender as a recipient for
alias and mailing list expansions that include the sender.
If this is
.I Not
set,
the sender will not receive a copy of the message only
as a result of being in an alias or mailing list.
.TP
.B \-N
Disable delivery of this message.
All other processing is performed,
and transports are expected to go through most of the steps involved
in delivery.
This is useful for debugging smail when you do not actually wish to
have messages delivered.
.TP
.B \-n
Do not perform alias processing.
This only prevents expansion of entries in alias files.
Mailing list files and forward files may still be expanded.
.TP
.B \-odb
Deliver mail in background, if mail delivery is to be
performed.  Background delivery is not currently supported
in the SMTP modes; foreground delivery is used instead.
.TP
.B \-odf
Deliver mail in foreground, if mail delivery is to be performed.
.TP
.BI \-oD " filename"
Sets the pathname of the director file.
This overrides the default name of the director file
as well as any name set in a config file.
If specified, then smail
sets the effective uid and gid back to the real uid
and gid,
to avoid problems when
installations allow smail
to be set uid to the superuser.
If the filename is
.B \-
then no director file is read.
This should only be used for debugging purposes.
.TP
.BI \-oE " filename"
Sets the pathname of the delivery retry control file.
This overrides the default name of the retry file
as well as any name set in a config file.
If specified, then smail
sets the effective uid and gid back to the real uid
and gid,
to avoid problems when
installations allows smail
to be set uid to the superuser (the normal case).
If the filename is
.B \-
then no retry file is read.
This should only be used for debugging purposes.
.TP
.BI \-oL " directory name"
Sets the pathname of the smail library directory.
This overrides the default value of
.I smail_lib_dir
compiled into the smail binary, as well as any name set in a config
file.  This string may be used to locate configuration files, such as the
director, router and transport files, alias and path files, and
mailing list directories.
.TP
.BI \-oQ " filename"
Sets the pathname of the hostname qualification file.
This overrides the default name of the qualify file
as well as any name set in a config file.
If specified, then smail
sets the effective uid and gid back to the real uid
and gid,
to avoid problems when
installations allows smail
to be set uid to the superuser (the normal case).
If the filename is
.B \-
then no qualify file is read.
This should only be used for debugging purposes.
.TP
.BI \-oR " filename"
Sets the pathname of the router file.
This overrides the default name of the router file
as well as any name set in a config file.
If specified, then smail
sets the effective uid and gid back to the real uid
and gid,
to avoid problems when
installations allows smail
to be set uid to the superuser (the normal case).
If the filename is
.B \-
then no router file is read.
This should only be used for debugging purposes.
.TP
.BI \-oT " filename"
Sets the pathname of the transport file.
This overrides the default name of the transport file
as well as any name set in a config file.
If specified, then smail
sets the effective uid and gid back to the real uid
and gid,
to avoid problems when
installations allow smail
to be set uid to the superuser.
If the filename is
.B \-
then no transport file is read.
This should only be used for debugging purposes.
.TP
\fB\-Q\fP or \fB\-odq\fP
Spool incoming messages but do not actually perform delivery
until a later queue.
This mode of operation is somewhat more efficient in terms
of CPU usage,
though it does
slow down the flow of mail.
.TP
.BI \-q [interval]
Cause smail to process its input spool directory.
If an interval is given,
smail will repeatedly check its input spool directory,
sleeping for the given interval between checks.
The interval is in seconds, though it can be defined
as a sequence of numbers with suffixes of
`s' for seconds, `m' for minutes,
`h' for hours, `d' for days, `w' for weeks and
`y' for years.
For example,
.B \-q2h30m
specifies an interval of two hours and 30 minutes.
This flag is useful in conjunction with the
.B \-bd
mode of operation and will cause the
daemon process to wake up on these
intervals and perform queue processing.
Performing a single queue run is the default mode
of operation if smail is invoked as
.IR runq .
.TP
.B \-t
Extract addresses from the
.BR To: ,
.BR Cc:
and
.BR Bcc:
fields of the message header.
This is useful for user agents that do not wish
to compute the recipient addresses themselves.
In this mode,
any addresses given on the command line are
addresses that explicitly will
.I NOT
receive mail,
even as a result of aliasing or forwarding expansions.
This option is ignored unless smail is in the mode set
by the
.B \-bm
flag (which is the default mode).
.TP
\fB\-V\fP or \fB\-bV\fP
Print the
.I smail
version on the standard output.
.TP
.B \-oU
Report memory usage when smail exits.
.TP
\fB\-oX\fP \fImail-service\fP
Set the TCP/IP service name or port number to be used for listening
for SMTP requests.  This can used in conjunction with the \fB\-bd\fP
mode to define alternate debugging versions of the smail SMTP listening
daemon, which may be useful in testing a new installation.
.TP
\fB\-oMs\fP \fIsender_host\fP
Specify the name of the system that send the mail message.  This value
can be included in expansion strings through the variable
\fB$sender_host\fP.
.TP
\fB\-oMr\fP \fIsender_proto\fP
Specify the protocol that was used by the sending host to deliver the
mail message.  This value can be included in expansion strings through
the variable \fB$sender_proto\fP.
.SH NORMAL USAGE
Under normal usage,
one smail daemon exists which receives requests from
remote hosts and processes the input spool directory at
intervals.
Such a daemon can be started from /etc/rc with a command such as
.pP
.in +.5i
smail \-bd \-q1h
.in -.5i
.pP
which will cause queue runs at one hour intervals.
.PP
New mail can be submitted from user agents
by calling smail directly and passing a message on standard
input.
Mailers such as BSD
.IR Mail (1)
and some System V
.IR mailx (1)
programs
submit mail by invoking smail with a command such as
.pP
.in +.5i
smail \-em \-i recipient-address ...
.in -.5i
.pP
Because smail also works correctly if invoked as
.I sendmail
it is common to install smail as
.I /usr/lib/sendmail
so that existing binaries on BSD systems,
or other systems that current run sendmail,
do not need to be modified to run smail instead.
.PP
Some user agents,
such as GNU Emacs may wish to have smail decipher
the recipient list from the header.
These programs may invoke smail
with a command such as
.pP
.in +.5i
smail \-em \-t \-i
.in -.5i
.PP
To receive mail over UUCP,
.I smail
can be invoked directly from
.I uuxqt
as
.I /bin/rmail.
Alternately,
.I /bin/rmail
can be another program that invokes
smail directly as
.pP
.in +.5i
smail \-em \-i \-fsender-address recipient address ...
.in -.5i
.pP
It is common for the System V based
.I /bin/rmail
program to perform delivery by itself,
resulting in mail bypassing
.I smail
altogether.
Such systems should replace
.I /bin/rmail
with a copy of
.I smail
or modify
.I /bin/rmail
so that it executes a copy of
.I smail
with the arguments as given above.

.TP \w'NOTE:'u+2n
NOTE:
In the future,
a separate program may be distributed with
smail to serve the function of rmail
at a lower cost.
This program will only write the input
spool file,
while allowing a smail daemon to process
messages at a later time.
This will save the cost of a complete
.IR exec (2)
of smail for each incoming message.
.PP
An alternative method of receiving mail
over UUCP is through the
.I rsmtp
command,
which receives batched SMTP requests.
This can be used between two
sites running smail to gain many of
the benefits of the SMTP protocol,
such as the ability to use recipient addresses
which UUX cannot correctly pass to a remote
rmail program.
For example, addresses containing quotes or
spaces cannot be expected to pass correctly
over an uux/rmail link.
However a uux/rsmtp link can handle such cases.
.SH SENDMAIL COMPATIBILITY
Smail was designed to be a plug-in replacement
for the BSD
.I sendmail
program,
in that external programs can
call smail in the same
manner that they previously called
.I sendmail
and expect similar results.
However,
smail is completely different internally
and has entirely different configuration
files.
As a result,
the
.B \-o
option to smail only sets a few
configuration parameters which were
felt to be commonly used by other
programs.
Also, for convenience, some new
(upper case only) parameters are defined only in smail.
Attempts to set other options using
this flag are ignored.
See the
.B OPTIONS
section for the complete list
of supported
.B \-o
options.
.PP
Because
.I smail
can be called
in a manner very similar to
.I sendmail
it is common to install smail as
.I /usr/lib/sendmail
so that no other program need be modified to
use the new mailer.
Thus,
once properly configured,
smail can be installed into a current sendmail-based environment,
including an environment without access to source,
with minimal effort.
.SH "SMAIL UNDER SYSTEM V"
The easiest way to install smail on a System V host is to install
it as
.IR /bin/rmail .
An alternative is cause
.IR mailx (1)
to call
.I /usr/lib/sendmail
by changine the
.IR mailx (1)
configuration file
.I /usr/lib/mailx/mailx.rc
to include a line such as:
.pP
.in +.5i
sendmail=/usr/lib/sendmail
.in -.5i
.pP
.PP
System V's
.IR mail (1)
command attempts to perform delivery by itself.
Use of
.IR mail (1)
to send mail should thus be discouraged
unless
.IR mail (1)
is modified to call
.I smail
to perform delivery.
.SH FILES
For many sites, the compiled in configuration of
.I smail
is sufficient and thus no configuration files are needed.
The following files and directories are from
the default smail configuration:

.PD .2v
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/config"
Optional general smail configuration.
This file can override compiled-in
configuration.
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/qualify"
Optional hostname qualification configuration file.
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/directors"
Optional configuration for smail directors,
i.e., configured methods for resolving
local addresses.
This file replaces the compiled-in
director configuration.
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/routers"
Optional configuration for smail routers,
i.e., configured methods for resolving
or routing to remote hosts.
This file replaces the compiled-in
router configuration.
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/transports"
Optional configuration for smail transports;
i.e., configured methods of mail delivery.
This file replaces the compiled-in
transport configuration.
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/retry"
Optional delivery retry configuration file;
i.e., minimum time between retries,
and maximum time to retry before giving up.
.PP
The following files are commonly used to locally redirect mail and
to give paths to remote sites.
.PP
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/aliases"
A file of aliases for local addresses.
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/paths"
A file of paths to remote hosts.
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_LIB_DIR_X/lists"
A directory of mailing list files.
.TP 2.5i
.I "X_MAILBOX_DIR_X"
The directory for user mailbox files.
.TP 2.5i
.I ~\&/.forward
Lists of forwarding addresses for
local users.
.PP
The
.I smail
mailer typically uses the following directories for working storage,
and to hold incoming mail messages.
.PP
.TP 2.5i
.I "/usr/spool/smail"
The top of the spool directory hierarchy.
.TP 2.5i
.I "/usr/spool/smail/input"
Smail's spool directory for incoming
messages.
.TP 2.5i
.I "/usr/spool/smail/error"
A directory for messages which failed for some reason
that the site administrator should investigate.
.TP 2.5i
.I "/usr/spool/smail/msglog"
A directory of transaction logs
for individual messages.
.TP 2.5i
.I "/usr/spool/smail/lock"
A directory used in smail input spool files.
.PP
The following files log the activity of the
.I smail
mailer.
The system administrator should check and truncate these
files from time.
.PP
.TP 2.5i
.I "/usr/spool/smail/log/logfile"
A log of smail transactions.
.TP 2.5i
.I "/usr/spool/smail/log/paniclog"
A log of configuration or system errors encountered by smail.
.PD
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exits with 0 if no errors, non\-0 otherwise.  See
.I /usr/include/sysexits.h
or
.I "src/exitcodes.h"
in the smail source for the list of possible exit codes.
.PP
If the
.I \-bd
option was used, then
.I "bind() failed: Address already in use"
implies that another process is already listening on the SMTP socket.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR binmail (1),
.IR mailx (1)
under System V,
.IR Mail (1)
under BSD,
.IR pathto (X_MAN1_EXT_X),
.IR smail (X_MAN5_EXT_X),
.IR "Smail Administration and Installation Guide" ,
.IR "Smail Design Document", 
DARPA Internet Requests for Comments,
RFC821, RFC822 and RFC976.
.SH BUGS
Many mail bugs are not smail bugs.
Smail can't help it if remote sites trash your mail messages.
.PP
If you find any bugs, please mail a description to the address
.I smail-bugs@veritas.com,
along with any code fixes that you may have.
.PP
Setting the input spool directory processing interval to a period of more than
2147483647 seconds is silly and will result in an incorrectly
calculated processing interval.
.PP
Route-addrs on protocol level 1 are too strong.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright(C)1987, 1988 Ronald S. Karr and Landon Curt Noll
.br
Copyright(C)1992 Ronald S. Karr
.br
See a file COPYING,
distributed with the source code,
or type
.I "smail -bc"
for distribution rights and restrictions
associated with this software.
