.TH FAX 1 "10 July 1991"
.SH NAME
fax or faxps \- send a fax

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fax
.RB "\-p phone"
.RB [ "\-m" ]
.RB [ "\-h host" ]
.RB [ "\-u user" ]
.RB [ "\-c" ]
.RB [ "\-r recipient" ]
.RB [ "\-s sender" ]
.RB [ "\-S reply fax" ]
.RB [ "file" ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B fax
and
.B faxps
commands sends electronic documents as CCITT Group 3 faxes to the 
specified fax phone numbers.  One or more phone numbers are given
with the -p command.

The
.B fax
command sends text files, which are converted to Postscipt using
a local program (perhaps enscript).

The
.B faxps
command send a raw Postscipt file, which is converted to Group 3
fax format using the Ghostscript program.

.SH OPTIONS
.LP
If no 
.I filename
is specified, 
.B fax
and
.B faxps
reads the text of your document from the standard input.  The
.B fax
command will accept more than one file name.  The
.B faxps
command takes at most a single Postscript file.
.TP 14
.B \-p phone
Specify a recipient phone number for the fax.  One or more -p options
can be given.
.TP
.B \-m
Tells the system to mail you a notice when the fax has been delivered
to all recipients, or when the transmission has timed out.
.TP
.B \-h host
Specifies the host for the fax spooler.  The environment variable
FAXHOST can also be used to specify this host.
.TP
.B \-u username
Specifies an alternative username for queuing the job.
.TP
.B \-c
Will create a coversheet, using the information specified in flags
that are described below.
.TP
.B \-r name
Specify the recipient's name to appear on the coversheet.
.TP
.B \-s name
Specifies the sender's name to appear on the coversheet.
.TP
.B \-S phone
Specifies the sender's return fax number to appear on the coversheet.

.SH USAGE

The phone number is given as a Hayes modem style dial string. 
Valid dial characters are:
.nf
0-9 Numeric Digits
* # A-D Auxiliary Digits
T   Tone Dialing
P   Pulse Dialing
,   Pause for (S8) seconds, default is 2 seconds
/   Pause 1/8 second in dialing sequence
W   Wait for second Dial Tone
.fi
In addition, prefixing the phone number with '@' will suppress the
number from appearing in the faxq.  This can help protect account
and credit card numbers.

.SH EXAMPLES
.LP

To fax the text file foo.text to 2 recipients, with the phone numbers
212-555-1212 and 314-555-1212, and receive email notification when
both faxes have been sent, issue the command:

.nf
prompt> fax -p 2125551212 -p 3145551212 -m foo.text
.fi

To fax the Postscript file foo.ps to 123-4567, with a coversheet
which has "To: Foo", "From: Bar", "Fax reply: 777-7777" issue
the command:

.nf
prompt> faxps -p 1234567 -c -r "Foo" -s "Bar" -S "777-7777" foo.ps
.fi

To send the standard input text to 123-4567 issue the command:

.nf
prompt> fax -p 123-4567
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
faxq(1), faxrm(1), faxenq(8), faxspooler(8)
