.TH FAXSPOOLER 8 "10 July 1991"
.SH NAME
faxspooler\- the fax system spooler program

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxspooler
.RB [ " \-l log level" ]
.RB [ " \-f fax device" ]
.RB [ " \-d max delivery time" ]
.RB [ " \-r max retry wait time" ]
.RB [ " \-D run as a daemon" ]
.RB [ " \-I use the specified incoming queue" ]
.RB [ " \-O use the specified outgoing queue" ]
.RB [ " \-E email address for incoming notification" ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B faxspooler
commands invokes the master fax spooler program.  This program
receives requests from other programs in the fax system, and
dispatches them to one or more fax modems.

The
.B faxspooler
will receive incoming faxes.  These faxes are stored in the incoming
spooler directory, in numbered order.  A directory is created for each
fax.  One file for each G3 page received is created.  Electronic mail
notification of each received fax is sent to the given notification
address.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 14
.B \-l log level
Specifies the debuging log level.  A level of 0 is the least verbose,
while a level of 7 is the most verbose.  These levels are the same
as used by syslog(8).
.TP
.B \-f device
Specifies the device to use for the fax modem.
.TP
.B \-d time
Specifies the maximum time, in seconds, to try sending a fax.
.TP
.B \-r time
Specifies the minimum time, in seconds, to wait between fax
delivery attempts.
.TP
.B \-D
Run the spooler as a daemon.
.TP
.B \-I directory
Use the given directory to spool incoming faxes.
.TP
.B \-O directory
Use the given directory to spool outgoing faxes.
.TP
.B \-E address
Use the given address for email notification of incoming faxes.

.SH BUGS
While the entire system is setup to handle multiple fax modems,
a little more work is required to the setup code to make this
work.

.SH SEE ALSO
fax(1), faxps(1), faxrm(1), faxq(1), faxenq(8)
