.TH audiocompose 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
audiocompose - Compose an audio fragment for inclusion in a mail message
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
\fBaudiocompose\fP  file-name
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I audiocompose
program will allow a user on a properly-equipped workstation to enter an audio fragment which will be written to the named file.  The user will be given the chance to listen to his clip after recording it, and to re-record it if he so desires.

This program is intended primarily to be called from mailcap files by programs like mailto(1).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The RECORD_AUDIO environment variable can be set to the name of a program that records audio, sending the digital audio to standard output.
.SH SEE ALSO
audiosend(1), mailto(1), metamail(1), showaudio(1)
.SH BUGS
Currently only works on Sun & Sony workstations equipped with microphones.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
