.TH audiosend 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
audiosend - Send an audio email message
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
\fBaudiosend\fP  
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I audiosend
program will allow a user on a properly-equipped workstation to send an audio fragment as electronic mail.  It will ask the user to provide the To, Subject, and CC fields.  It will then let the user record his message.  Afterwards, the user will be given the options of delivering the mail, listening to the message, re-recording the message, or aborting.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The RECORD_AUDIO environment variable can be set to the name of a program that records audio, sending the digital audio to standard output.
.SH SEE ALSO
audiocompose(1), mailto(1), metamail(1), metasend(1), mmencode(1), showaudio(1)
.SH BUGS
Currently only works on Sun & Sony workstations equipped with microphones.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
