.TH ezview 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
ezview - View an Andrew "ez" format document
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
\fBezview\fP  [path-to-ez] file name
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I ezview
program allows users to view Andrew-format files.  If the Andrew "ez" program is present on the search path, it will try to run it.  If that program is not present, or if it cannot run (e.g. because the user is not running X11), ezview will produce, on stdout, a text-only version of the Andrew document.  This text-only version will have all font information removed, and will replace embedded objects such as pictures with a statement to the effect that "a picture appeared here".

If ezview is called with two arguments, the first is interpreted as a full path name for the "ez" command.

If the file named is simply "-", ezview will read from standard input.

Users not accustomed to Andrew may find it useful to know that if you hold down the middle mouse button
in an Andrew window, you will get a set of menus, one of which is "Quit." 
.SH SEE ALSO
metamail(1)
.SH BUGS
Nope.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, with parts derived from the Andrew distribution.
