.TH getfilename 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
getfilename - Ask the user to name a file in a given format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
\fBgetfilename\fP  format-name file-name
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I getfilename
program will ask the user for the name of a file in the specified format, and will copy that file to the file-name given as the second argument.

If this doesn't sound very useful by itself, you're right.  However, this turns out to be all you need in order to add some useful functionality to mailcap-oriented programs such as mailto(1).  For example, the following line in a mailcap file allows mailto to help the user include PostScript in outgoing mail:

application/postscript ; lpr -Pipa %s ; label="Include a Postscript File";\
	compose="getfilename Postscript %s"

.SH SEE ALSO
mailto(1), metamail(1)
.SH BUGS
This is such a tiny program it might actually be bug-free, but I wouldn't bet on it.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
