.TH metasend 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
metasend - Crude interface for sending non-text mail
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
\fBmetasend\fP  [-b] [-c cc] [-e encoding] [-f filename] [-m MIME-type] [-s subject] [-S splitsize] [-t to] [-z]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I metasend
program will allow a user to send a pre-existing data file as non-text audio mail.

With no arguments, the program will ask the user for the To, Subject, and CC fields.  It will then ask for the name of an existing file.  Next, it will ask the  user to provide the MIME content-type field value, which is something that most users won't know how to answer.  Finally, it will ask what encoding type, if any, should be applied to this data.

Alternately, all of this information can be provided on the comand line, using the following options:

    -t to -- specifies the To address
    -c cc -- specifies the CC address
    -e encoding -- specifies the encoding type.  Must be either "base64", "quoted-printable", "7bit", or "x-uue".  "7bit" means no encoding is performed.
    -f filename -- specifies the file containing the data
    -m MIME-type -- specifies the MIME content-type
    -s subject -- specifies the Subject field
    -S splitsize -- specifies the maximum size before splitting into parts via splitmail(1).
    -b -- specifies Batch (non-interactive) Mode.  Will exit with an error message if -f, -m, -s,  and -t are not also used.
    -z -- specifies that the temporary files should be deleted EVEN IF DELIVERY FAILS.

This is intended largely for mail hackers.  A much friendlier interface to non-text mail is provided by mailto(1).

The mail will be delivered using the splitmail(1) program, so if long it will arrive as several pieces which can be automatically reassembled by metamail.  The definition of "long" can be altered using the -S flag or the SPLITSIZE environment variable, as described in the splitmail(1) man page.
.SH SEE ALSO
audiosend(1), mailto-hebrew(1), mailto(1), metamail(1), mmencode(1), splitmail(1)
.SH BUGS
Should do a better job of choosing the encoding if you don't specify one.  
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
