.TH MIME 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
MIME -- Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
Not a command -- see the SEE ALSO section for usable commands.
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I MIME
is the official proposed standard format for extended Internet electronic mail.  The MIME format permits email to include enhanced text, graphics, audio, and more, in a standardized and interoperable manner.  If you send and receive mail with a MIME-compliant mail system, you will be able to send and receive far more than ASCII text.

Various different people and companies are implementing MIME-compliant software.  This man page was provided, by user request, as part of the freely-available "metamail" distribution from Bellcore.  Metamail provides a complete MIME implementation, but there may well be others at your site, too.  The "SEE ALSO" section only refers to the tools that came as part of the metamail distribution.
.SH SEE ALSO
metamail(1), mailto(1), metasend(1), mmencode(1), richtext(1), splitmail(1), mailto-hebrew(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
