.TH patch-metamail 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
patch-metamail - Install a patch to the latest metamail release
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
\fBpatch-metamail\fP   source-tree-root patch-number [hostname [dirname [prefix]]]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I patch-metamail
program will attempt to retreive a patch file for the metamail distribution, using anonymous ftp to a trusted server, and then install that patch in your local copy of the distribution.

The first two arguments, which are required, are the root directory of your local copy of the metamail source directory, and the patch number.  The former is site-dependent, the latter is patch-dependent.

In general, patch-metamail is intended to be called via metamail, with a mailcap entry like the following:

application/x-metamail-patch;patch-metamail source-tree-root %{patchnumber}; needsterminal

The default values for the host to ftp to, the directory name to retrieve the file from, and the patch file name prefix are hard-wired to thumper.bellcore.com, pub/nsb, and "mm.patch.".  While you can override these on the command line, it would be a big mistake to make these parameterized based on the contents of a mail message, because then someone could spoof you into retrieving a new version of metamail with a Trojan horse from their site!  However, as long as you retain control over what host and directory the patches are retrieved from, this program is reasonably safe (as safe as the host you're depending on, anyway).

.SH SEE ALSO
metamail(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
