.TH shownonascii 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
shownonascii - View all or part of a mail message in a non-ASCII font
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
\fBshownonascii\fP  charset-font-name [-e command-to-execute] file-name(s)
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I shownonascii
program allows data in non-ASCII character sets to be viewed under X11.    By default, it will open up an xterm using the font named in the first argument, running the "more" command to view all of the files named on the command line.

If the -e switch is used, the rest of the command line will be taken as the command to tell xterm to run instead of more.  

If the MM_CHARSET environment variable is set and matches the character set named in the first argument, a new xterm window will not be opened.
.SH SEE ALSO
mailto-hebrew(1), mailto(1), metamail(1)
.SH BUGS
Nope.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
