.TH showaudio 1 "Release 1"
.SH NAME
showaudio - Play an audio email message
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta 8n
\fBshowaudio\fP  file-name(s)
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I showaudio
program will allow a user on a properly-equipped workstation to listen to an audio message.  It is intended to be called from mailcap files, typically by the metamail(1) program.

At most sites, it will work by playing audio on the speaker of the user's computer.  When used in conjunction with special hardware and software not part of the metamail distribution, however, it can also deliver the audio information by telephone number.  There are various options to showaudio that support this feature, but they are not documented here since the functionality is not generally available.
.SH SEE ALSO
audiocompose(1), audiosend(1), metamail(1)
.SH BUGS
Currently plays audio only on Sun & Sony workstations.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1991 Bell Communications Research, Inc. (Bellcore)

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this material 
for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided 
that the above copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in all copies, and that the name of Bellcore not be 
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
material without the specific, prior written permission 
of an authorized representative of Bellcore.  BELLCORE 
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE ACCURACY OR SUITABILITY 
OF THIS MATERIAL FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS", 
WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel S. Borenstein, Bellcore
