'\"                        Copyright (c) 1988 Bellcore
'\"                            All Rights Reserved
'\"       Permission is granted to copy or use this program, EXCEPT that it
'\"       may not be sold for profit, the copyright notice must be reproduced
'\"       on copies, and credit should be given to Bellcore where it is due.
'\"       BELLCORE MAKES NO WARRANTY AND ACCEPTS NO LIABILITY FOR THIS PROGRAM.
'\"
'\"	$Header: croff.1,v 1.1 88/07/07 10:11:58 sau Exp $
'\"	$Source: /tmp/mgrsrc/doc/usrman/croff/RCS/croff.1,v $
.TH croff 1L "June 30, 1987"
.SH NAME
croff \- prepare C source code for inclusion in a troff document
.SH SYNOPSIS
cat <files> \(or 
.B croff
[ \fB\-Ft\fP]
[ \fB\-a|d \fP\fI<key_word>\fP ]
[ \fB\-k|c|i|f|p \fP\fI<start> <end>\fP ]
[ \fB\-e \fP\fI<end>\fP ]
\(or troff ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Croff
is a 
troff preprocessor
that prepares C source code for the inclusion in a troff document.
In the default case, all C keywords 
and c preprosessor keywords are emboldened, whereas comments are
set in italics.  In additions the characters '\e', '\-' and '\(or' are
munged to appear properly in the troff output.
A line in
.I file
that begins with 
.B .SS
starts the croff filter, whereas a line in
.I file
that begins with
.B .SE
suspends the filtering process.
the
.B .SS
and
.B .SE
are passed through croff unchanged, and may be defined as 
.B troff
macros if desired.
Up to the first 4 arguments on the same line as
.B .SS
are interpreted by croff to be the keyword starting string, comment starting
string, keywork ending string, and comment ending string respectively.
When specified here, these strings override
the defaults or the command line arguments.
.LP
The following options are recognized on the command line:
.TP
.B \-F
The entire file is forced though
.B croff, no 
.B .SS
and
.B .SE
are required.
.TP
.B \-t
The characters '\e', '\-' and '\|' are left alone.
.TP
\fB\-a \fP\fIkeyword\fP
.I Keyword
is added to the list of reserved words taken to be keywords
.TP
\fB\-d \fP\fIkeyword\fP
.I Keyword
is deleted to the list of reserved words taken to be keywords
.TP 
\fB\-[kcifp] \fP\fIstart end\fP
The strings
.I start
and
.I end
are used to delimit keywords, comments, identifiers, function calls, and
preprocessor declarations respectively.  The default is
.RS
croff \fB\-e\fP "\efP" \fB\-k\fP "\efB" \fB\-c\fP "\efI" \fB\-p\fP "\efB"
.RE
to set keywords in
.B bold
and comments in
.I  italics.
The
.I end
string may be omitted if the default value is ok.
.TP
\fB\-e \fP\fIend\fP
sets the 
.I end
string to all of the options
.B k,c,i,f,p
above;
.SH SEE ALSO
troff(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Stephen A. Uhler
