'\"
'\" Copyright 1990, 1991 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /user6/ouster/wish/man/RCS/GetColor.man,v 1.7 92/08/25 13:47:44 ouster Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.\" The definitions below are for supplemental macros used in Sprite
.\" manual entries.
.\"
.\" .HS name section [date [version]]
.\"	Replacement for .TH in other man pages.  See below for valid
.\"	section names.
.\"
.\" .AP type name in/out [indent]
.\"	Start paragraph describing an argument to a library procedure.
.\"	type is type of argument (int, etc.), in/out is either "in", "out",
.\"	or "in/out" to describe whether procedure reads or modifies arg,
.\"	and indent is equivalent to second arg of .IP (shouldn't ever be
.\"	needed;  use .AS below instead)
.\"
.\" .AS [type [name]]
.\"	Give maximum sizes of arguments for setting tab stops.  Type and
.\"	name are examples of largest possible arguments that will be passed
.\"	to .AP later.  If args are omitted, default tab stops are used.
.\"
.\" .BS
.\"	Start box enclosure.  From here until next .BE, everything will be
.\"	enclosed in one large box.
.\"
.\" .BE
.\"	End of box enclosure.
.\"
.\" .VS
.\"	Begin vertical sidebar, for use in marking newly-changed parts
.\"	of man pages.
.\"
.\" .VE
.\"	End of vertical sidebar.
.\"
.\" .DS
.\"	Begin an indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .DE
.\"	End of indented unfilled display.
.\"
'\"	# Heading for Sprite man pages
.de HS
.if '\\$2'cmds'       .TH \\$1 1 \\$3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'lib'        .TH \\$1 3 \\$3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'tcl'        .TH \\$1 3 \\$3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'tk'         .TH \\$1 3 \\$3 \\$4
.if t .wh -1.3i ^B
.nr ^l \\n(.l
.ad b
..
'\"	# Start an argument description
.de AP
.ie !"\\$4"" .TP \\$4
.el \{\
.   ie !"\\$2"" .TP \\n()Cu
.   el          .TP 15
.\}
.ie !"\\$3"" \{\
.ta \\n()Au \\n()Bu
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP	(\\$3)
.\".b
.\}
.el \{\
.br
.ie !"\\$2"" \{\
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP
.\}
.el \{\
\&\\fI\\$1\\fP
.\}
.\}
..
'\"	# define tabbing values for .AP
.de AS
.nr )A 10n
.if !"\\$1"" .nr )A \\w'\\$1'u+3n
.nr )B \\n()Au+15n
.\"
.if !"\\$2"" .nr )B \\w'\\$2'u+\\n()Au+3n
.nr )C \\n()Bu+\\w'(in/out)'u+2n
..
'\"	# BS - start boxed text
'\"	# ^y = starting y location
'\"	# ^b = 1
.de BS
.br
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 1u
.if n .nf
.if n .ti 0
.if n \l'\\n(.lu\(ul'
.if n .fi
..
'\"	# BE - end boxed text (draw box now)
.de BE
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
.ie n \l'\\n(^lu\(ul'
.el \{\
.\"	Draw four-sided box normally, but don't draw top of
.\"	box if the box started on an earlier page.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \{\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.el \}\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.\}
.fi
.br
.nr ^b 0
..
'\"	# VS - start vertical sidebar
'\"	# ^Y = starting y location
'\"	# ^v = 1 (for troff;  for nroff this doesn't matter)
.de VS
.mk ^Y
.ie n 'mc \s12\(br\s0
.el .nr ^v 1u
..
'\"	# VE - end of vertical sidebar
.de VE
.ie n 'mc
.el \{\
.ev 2
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\L'|\\n(^Yu-1v\(bv'\v'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu'\h'-|\\n(^lu+3n'
.sp -1
.fi
.ev
.\}
.nr ^v 0
..
'\"	# Special macro to handle page bottom:  finish off current
'\"	# box/sidebar if in box/sidebar mode, then invoked standard
'\"	# page bottom macro.
.de ^B
.ev 2
'ti 0
'nf
.mk ^t
.if \\n(^b \{\
.\"	Draw three-sided box if this is the box's first page,
.\"	draw two sides but no top otherwise.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.el \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.nr ^x \\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu
\kx\h'-\\nxu'\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\ky\L'-\\n(^xu'\v'\\n(^xu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.bp
'fi
.ev
.if \\n(^b \{\
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 2
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.mk ^Y
.\}
..
'\"	# DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
'\"	# DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp .5
..
.HS Tk_GetColor tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_GetColor, Tk_GetColorByValue, Tk_NameOfColor Tk_FreeColor \- maintain database of colors
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
XColor *
\fBTk_GetColor\fR(\fIinterp, tkwin, colorMap, nameId\fB)\fR
.sp
XColor *
\fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR(\fIinterp, tkwin, colorMap, prefPtr\fB)\fR
.sp
char *
\fBTk_NameOfColor(\fIcolorPtr\fB)\fR
.sp
\fBTk_FreeColor(\fIcolorPtr\fB)\fR
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS "Tcl_Interp" *colorPtr
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter to use for error reporting.
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window in which color will be used.
.AP Colormap colormap in
Colormap from which to allocate color.  If None, then the default
colormap for \fItkwin\fR's screen is used.
.AP Tk_Uid nameId in
Textual description of desired color.
.AP XColor *prefPtr in
Indicates red, green, and blue intensities of desired
color.
.AP XColor *colorPtr in
Pointer to X color information.  Must have been allocated by previous
call to \fBTk_GetColor\fR or \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR, except when passed
to \fBTk_NameOfColor\fR.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The \fBTk_GetColor\fR and \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR procedures
locate pixel values that may be used to render particular
colors in the window given by \fItkwin\fR using the colormap
given by \fIcolormap\fR.  In \fBTk_GetColor\fR
the desired color is specified with a Tk_Uid (\fInameId\fR), which
may have any of the following forms:
.TP 20
\fIcolorname\fR
Any of the valid textual names for a color defined in the
server's color database file, such as \fBred\fR or \fBPeachPuff\fR.
.TP 20
\fB#\fIRGB\fR
.TP 20
\fB#\fIRRGGBB\fR
.TP 20
\fB#\fIRRRGGGBBB\fR
.TP 20
\fB#\fIRRRRGGGGBBBB\fR
A numeric specification of the red, green, and blue intensities
to use to display the color.  Each \fIR\fR, \fIG\fR, or \fIB\fR
represents a single hexadecimal digit.  The four forms permit
colors to be specified with 4-bit, 8-bit, 12-bit or 16-bit values.
When fewer than 16 bits are provided for each color, they represent
the most significant bits of the color.  For example, #3a7 is the
same as #3000a0007000.
.LP
In \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR, the desired color is indicated with
the \fIred\fR, \fIgreen\fR, and \fIblue\fR fields of the structure
pointed to by \fIcolorPtr\fR.
.PP
If \fBTk_GetColor\fR or \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR is successful
in allocating the desired color, then it returns a pointer to
an XColor structure;  the structure indicates the exact intensities of
the allocated color (which may differ slightly from those requested,
depending on the limitations of the screen) and a pixel value
from \fIcolormap\fR that may be used to draw in the color.
If an error occurs in allocating a color then NULL is returned
and an error message will be stored in \fIinterp->result\fR.
.PP
\fBTk_GetColor\fR and \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR maintain a database
of all the colors currently in use.
If the same \fInameId\fR is requested multiple times from
\fBTk_GetColor\fR (e.g. by different windows), or if the
same intensities are requested multiple times from
\fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR, then existing pixel values will
be re-used.  Re-using an existing pixel avoids any interaction
with the X server, which makes the allocation much more
efficient.  For this reason, you should generally use
\fBTk_GetColor\fR or \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR
instead of Xlib procedures like \fBXAllocColor\fR,
\fBXAllocNamedColor\fR, or \fBXParseColor\fR.
.PP
Since different calls to \fBTk_GetColor\fR or \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR
may return the same shared
pixel value, callers should never change the color of a pixel
returned by the procedures.
If you need to change a color value dynamically, you should use
\fBXAllocColorCells\fR to allocate the pixel value for the color.
.PP
The procedure \fBTk_NameOfColor\fR is roughly the inverse of
\fBTk_GetColor\fR.  If its \fIcolorPtr\fR argument was created
by \fBTk_GetColor\fR, then the return value is the \fInameId\fR
string that was passed to \fBTk_GetColor\fR to create the
color.  If \fIcolorPtr\fR was created by a call to \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR,
or by any other mechanism, then the return value is a string
that could be passed to \fBTk_GetColor\fR to return the same
color.  Note:  the string returned by \fBTk_NameOfColor\fR is
only guaranteed to persist until the next call to \fBTk_NameOfColor\fR.
.PP
When a pixel value returned by \fBTk_GetColor\fR or
\fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR is no longer
needed, \fBTk_FreeColor\fR should be called to release the color.
There should be exactly one call to \fBTk_FreeColor\fR for
each call to \fBTk_GetColor\fR or \fBTk_GetColorByValue\fR.
When a pixel value is no longer in
use anywhere (i.e. it has been freed as many times as it has been gotten)
\fBTk_FreeColor\fR will release it to the X server and delete it from
the database.

.SH KEYWORDS
color, intensity, pixel value
