'\"
'\" Copyright 1990 Regents of the University of California
'\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
'\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
'\" granted, provided that this notice appears in all copies.
'\" The University of California makes no representations about
'\" the suitability of this material for any purpose.  It is
'\" provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.
'\" 
'\" $Header: /user6/ouster/wish/man/RCS/RegInterp.man,v 1.3 91/12/06 10:39:28 ouster Exp $ SPRITE (Berkeley)
'\" 
.\" The definitions below are for supplemental macros used in Sprite
.\" manual entries.
.\"
.\" .HS name section [date [version]]
.\"	Replacement for .TH in other man pages.  See below for valid
.\"	section names.
.\"
.\" .AP type name in/out [indent]
.\"	Start paragraph describing an argument to a library procedure.
.\"	type is type of argument (int, etc.), in/out is either "in", "out",
.\"	or "in/out" to describe whether procedure reads or modifies arg,
.\"	and indent is equivalent to second arg of .IP (shouldn't ever be
.\"	needed;  use .AS below instead)
.\"
.\" .AS [type [name]]
.\"	Give maximum sizes of arguments for setting tab stops.  Type and
.\"	name are examples of largest possible arguments that will be passed
.\"	to .AP later.  If args are omitted, default tab stops are used.
.\"
.\" .BS
.\"	Start box enclosure.  From here until next .BE, everything will be
.\"	enclosed in one large box.
.\"
.\" .BE
.\"	End of box enclosure.
.\"
.\" .VS
.\"	Begin vertical sidebar, for use in marking newly-changed parts
.\"	of man pages.
.\"
.\" .VE
.\"	End of vertical sidebar.
.\"
.\" .DS
.\"	Begin an indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .DE
.\"	End of indented unfilled display.
.\"
'\"	# Heading for Sprite man pages
.de HS
.if '\\$2'cmds'       .TH \\$1 1 \\$3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'lib'        .TH \\$1 3 \\$3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'tcl'        .TH \\$1 3 \\$3 \\$4
.if '\\$2'tk'         .TH \\$1 3 \\$3 \\$4
.if t .wh -1.3i ^B
.nr ^l \\n(.l
.ad b
..
'\"	# Start an argument description
.de AP
.ie !"\\$4"" .TP \\$4
.el \{\
.   ie !"\\$2"" .TP \\n()Cu
.   el          .TP 15
.\}
.ie !"\\$3"" \{\
.ta \\n()Au \\n()Bu
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP	(\\$3)
.\".b
.\}
.el \{\
.br
.ie !"\\$2"" \{\
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP
.\}
.el \{\
\&\\fI\\$1\\fP
.\}
.\}
..
'\"	# define tabbing values for .AP
.de AS
.nr )A 10n
.if !"\\$1"" .nr )A \\w'\\$1'u+3n
.nr )B \\n()Au+15n
.\"
.if !"\\$2"" .nr )B \\w'\\$2'u+\\n()Au+3n
.nr )C \\n()Bu+\\w'(in/out)'u+2n
..
'\"	# BS - start boxed text
'\"	# ^y = starting y location
'\"	# ^b = 1
.de BS
.br
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 1u
.if n .nf
.if n .ti 0
.if n \l'\\n(.lu\(ul'
.if n .fi
..
'\"	# BE - end boxed text (draw box now)
.de BE
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
.ie n \l'\\n(^lu\(ul'
.el \{\
.\"	Draw four-sided box normally, but don't draw top of
.\"	box if the box started on an earlier page.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \{\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.el \}\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.\}
.fi
.br
.nr ^b 0
..
'\"	# VS - start vertical sidebar
'\"	# ^Y = starting y location
'\"	# ^v = 1 (for troff;  for nroff this doesn't matter)
.de VS
.mk ^Y
.ie n 'mc \s12\(br\s0
.el .nr ^v 1u
..
'\"	# VE - end of vertical sidebar
.de VE
.ie n 'mc
.el \{\
.ev 2
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\L'|\\n(^Yu-1v\(bv'\v'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu'\h'-|\\n(^lu+3n'
.sp -1
.fi
.ev
.\}
.nr ^v 0
..
'\"	# Special macro to handle page bottom:  finish off current
'\"	# box/sidebar if in box/sidebar mode, then invoked standard
'\"	# page bottom macro.
.de ^B
.ev 2
'ti 0
'nf
.mk ^t
.if \\n(^b \{\
.\"	Draw three-sided box if this is the box's first page,
.\"	draw two sides but no top otherwise.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.el \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.nr ^x \\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu
\kx\h'-\\nxu'\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\ky\L'-\\n(^xu'\v'\\n(^xu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.bp
'fi
.ev
.if \\n(^b \{\
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 2
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.mk ^Y
.\}
..
'\"	# DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
'\"	# DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp .5
..
.HS Tk_RegisterInterp tk
.BS
.SH NAME
Tk_RegisterInterp \- make an interpreter accessible with ``send'' command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tk.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTk_RegisterInterp\fR(\fIinterp, name, tkwin\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tk_Window parent
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter to register in display associated with \fItkwin\fR.
Also used to return errors if registration failed.
.AP char *name in
Name under which to register interpreter.  Must be unique among
all registered interpreters for \fItkwin\fR's display.  May not
contain the character ``|''.
.AP Tk_Window tkwin in
Token for window.  Used only to find a display in which to
register \fIinterp\fR.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTk_RegisterInterp\fR is invoked to associate a name (\fIname\fR) with a
Tcl interpreter (\fIinterp\fR) and record that association in a well-known
property of a particular display (the one containing \fItkwin\fR).
After this procedure has been invoked, other interpreters in the
display will be able to use the \fBsend\fR command to invoke operations
remotely in \fIinterp\fR.  The procedure returns TCL_OK if the
registration completed successfully and TCL_ERROR if the interpreter
could not be registered (e.g. because \fIname\fR is already in use).
In the event of an error, \fIinterp->result\fR is modified to point
to a message describing the error.
.PP
This procedure also adds a \fBsend\fR command to \fIinterp\fR, so
that commands may be sent from \fIinterp\fR to other interpreters.
.PP
The registration persists until the interpreter is deleted or the
\fBsend\fR command is deleted from \fIinterp\fR, at which
point \fIinterp\fR is automatically unregistered.
.PP
\fBTk_RegisterInterp\fR is called automatically by \fBTk_CreateMainWindow\fR,
so applications don't normally need to call it explicitly.

.SH KEYWORDS
interpreter, name, register, send command
