'\"                        Copyright (c) 1988 Bellcore
'\"                            All Rights Reserved
'\"       Permission is granted to copy or use this program, EXCEPT that it
'\"       may not be sold for profit, the copyright notice must be reproduced
'\"       on copies, and credit should be given to Bellcore where it is due.
'\"       BELLCORE MAKES NO WARRANTY AND ACCEPTS NO LIABILITY FOR THIS PROGRAM.
'\"
.TL
\*M - C Language Application Interface
.AU
Stephen A. Uhler
.AI
Bell Communications Research
.Sh nopage Introduction
.FS
.ce 2
Copyright (c) 1988 Bellcore
All Rights Reserved
.br
Permission is granted to copy or use this program, EXCEPT that it
may not be sold for profit, the copyright notice must be reproduced
on copies, and credit should be given to Bellcore where it is due.
BELLCORE MAKES NO WARRANTY AND ACCEPTS NO LIABILITY FOR THIS PROGRAM.
.FE
\*M
(\fBm\fPana\fBg\fPe\fBr\fP)
is a window system for Unix that currently runs on Sun Workstations.
\*M manages asynchronous updates of overlapping windows
and provides application support for a heterogeneous network
environment, i.e.,
many different types of computers connected by various 
communications media.
The application interface enables applications (called client programs) to be
written in a variety of programming languages, and run on different
operating systems.
The client program can take full 
advantage of the windowing capabilities 
regardless of the
type of connection to the workstation running \*M.
.LP
Client programs communicate with \*M via
.I pseudo-terminals 
over a reliable byte stream.
Each client program can create and manipulate one or more windows
on the display, with commands and data to the various windows multiplexed over 
the same connection.
\*M provides
.SM
ASCII
.LG
terminal emulation and takes responsibility for
maintaining the integrity of the window contents when parts of windows become 
obscured and subsequently uncovered.
This permits naive applications to work without modification
by providing a default environment that appears to be an ordinary terminal.
.LP
In addition to terminal emulation, \*M provides each client window with:
graphics primitives such as line and circle drawing; facilities for 
manipulating bitmaps, fonts, icons, and pop-up menus;
commands to reshape
and position windows; and a message passing
facility enabling client programs
to rendezvous and exchange messages.
Client programs may ask to be informed when a change in the window system
occurs, such as a reshaped window, a pushed mouse button,
or a message sent from another client program.
These changes are called events.
\*M notifies a client program of an event by sending
it an
.SM
ASCII
.LG
character string in a format specified by the client program.
Existing applications can be integrated into the
windowing environment without modification by having \*M
imitate keystrokes in response to user defined menus or
other events.
.LP
The user interface provides a simple point-and-select model of 
interaction using the mouse with pop-up menus and
quick access to system functions through meta-keys on the keyboard.
\*M also provides a 
.I cut
and
.I  paste
.R
function that permits a user to sweep out and copy text from any window
and paste it into any other.
.LP
This document describes the low level 
C interface library for \*M.
The 
.I
C Interface library
.R
provides a set of macros and functions which implement the stream protocol
and provide clients written in
.B C
with a function call interface to \*M.
This library provides the lowest level access to \*M functions
and represents a direct mapping to the underlying protocol.
It is expected that a higher level interface will evolve to support
application development at a higher level.
The library requires only the
.SM
UNIX
.LG
.I "Standard I/O Library"
for its operation and access to a byte sequential I/O
interface from the underlying operating system.
.Sh page Model of Interaction
The basic unit within \*M is the window.
A window is a rectangular region on the display, surrounded by a
border, with a single connection to other processes.
All interactions among the client program, the user and \*M are
defined entirely in terms of the state
of a client's window or windows.
\*M has no concept of window types; there are no separate
.I "graphics windows" ,
.I "text windows" ,
or
.I "edit windows" .
Every window supports exactly the same set of capabilities as
every other window.
In addition, all windows act independently.
Client programs need not know or care about the existence of other
clients or windows that happen to coexist on the same display.
The management of overlapping windows is handled entirely by \*M.
For example,
when a window is partially or totally obscured by another window,
then subsequently uncovered, \*M restores the integrity of the
window's contents.
There are no
.I sub-windows ,
windows whose size or position are in some
way restricted by a parent window.
A client may create and manipulate many windows, each of which
may be positioned and sized independently on the display.
.LP
At any given time there is one special window on the display,
the
.I active
window.
This is the window that receives keystrokes and mouse data.
It is distinguishable to the user from the other windows on the
display by its emboldened border.
The active window, in addition to receiving all mouse and keyboard
data, is also logically in front of the other windows
on the display.
The active window is, therefore, always completely exposed.
Any window can become the active window, but there can only be one 
active window at a time.
.LP
A client program may change its window at any time, write text into it,
draw lines, anything, so long as the change is
.I local ,
that is the change affects just its window.
Only the active window may effect 
.I global
changes
to the display,
such as changing its shape or position.
The only global action a
.I non-active
window may perform is to become the active window.
This window model provides both the user and
application developer with a simple,
consistent model of interaction.
.Sh nopage Coordinate Systems
\*M uses four different coordinate systems,
.I display
coordinates ,
.I "absolute window"
coordinates,
.I "relative window"
coordinates,
and
.I character
coordinates.
The entire display is represented by
.I "display coordinates"
whereas each window has its own
.I "absolute window" ,
.I "relative window" ,
and
.I character
coordinate systems.
.LP  
.I "Display coordinates"
are in units of pixels.
The coordinate
.Fr "" 0 0
is the top left
pixel on the display.  The
.B X
coordinate increases to the right, the
.B Y
coordinate
increases down.
The maximum
.B X
and
.B Y
coordinate depend upon the particular display in use,
for the SUN-3 they are
.Fi 1152
by
.Fi 900 .
Commands that operate on the context of the entire display, such as
reshaping a window are specified in 
.I display
coordinates.
Windows, when measured
in
.I display
coordinates include their borders.
.LP
.I "Absolute window coordinates" ,
as with
.I "display coordinates" ,
are measured in units of pixels.
The
.Fi X
and
.Fi Y
values increase to the right and down respectively.
The origin, coordinate
.Fr "" 0 0
is at the top left corner of the window, just inside the window border.
.LP
.I "Relative window coordinates"
are measured as a fraction of the window's size and shape.
As with
.I "absolute window coordinates" ,
each window has its origin, 
.Fr "" 0 0
, at the top left corner of the window just inside the border,
however the lower right corner of the window is always at 
coordinate
.Fr "" 999 999
\&.
Graphics commands to a window in 
.I "relative window coordinates"
are automatically scaled to the size of the window.
.LP
.I "Character coordinates"
are measured in rows and columns in the current
font, just like an ordinary terminal.
The coordinate
.Fr "" 0 0 
is the top left character
position in the window.
The maximum
.I row
and
.I column
in the window
depends on both the window and font size.
.Sh nopage Functional Overview
The types of commands a client program may issue \*M
are divided into 14
categories:
.I "terminal emulation" ,
.I graphics ,
.I bit-blts ,
.I "window positioning" ,
.I "font changes" ,
.I "state inquiry" ,
.I "saved contexts" ,
.I menus ,
.I events ,
.I "sweep functions" ,
.I "multiple window manipulation" ,
.I "cut and paste" ,
.I messages ,
and
.I "window modes" .
What follows is a brief description of those command categories,
and some examples of specific functions within the category.
A detailed description of each command is provided in the following
section.
.LP
.B
Terminal Emulation
.R
.br
At its basic level, every \*M window emulates a
.I \s-2CRT\s+2
terminal.
It provides functions for
.I inserting
and
.I deleting
lines and characters, highlighting text, clearing areas and windows, and
arbitrary cursor motion capabilities.
Sample \*M 
.I \s-2TERMCAP\s+2
and
.I \s-2TERMINFO\s+2
descriptions are given in the tables below.
No entries are provided for keyboard key values,
as they depend upon the particular keyboard in use.
.Mk	\" mark vertical baseline or later return
.TS
box;
c s
l s
l lflrp-2.
Sample \*M \fIT\s-2ERMCAP\fP\s+2 Entry
_
Px \(br \*M \(br \*M terminal:\e
  :am:bs:im=:ta=^I:\e
  :AL=\eE%da:al=\eEa:\e
  :cd=\eEC:ce=\eEc:cl=^L:\e
  :cm=\eE%r%d,%dM:\e
  :co#80:li#24:\e
  :cs=\eE%d,%dt:\e
  :DC=\eE%dE:dc=\eEE:\e
  :DL=\eE%dd:dl=\eEd:\e
  :do=\eEf:up=\eEu:nd=\eEr:\e
  :IC=\eE%dA:ic=\eEA:\e
  :se=\eEn:so=\eEi:\e
  :ve=\eEv:vs=\eEV:
.TE
.Go 3.1i	\" return to baseline shifted right
.TS
box;
c s
l s
l lflrp-2.
Sample \*M \fIT\s-2ERMINFO\s+2\fP Entry
_
Px \(br \*M \(br \*M Terminal,
  cols#80, lines#24,
  am, msgr, ht=^I,
  clear=^L, cr=^M, bel=^G, 
  cub1=^H, cud1=\eEf, cuf1=\eEr,
  cuu1=\eEu, ind=^J,
  cup=\eE%p2%d;%p1%dM,
  csr=\eE%p1%d;%p2%dt,
  wind=\eE%p2%d;%p2%p4%+%d;%p1;%p1%p3%+%d;t,
  el=\eEc, ed=\eEC,
  il1=\eEa, dl1=\eEd,
  il=\eE%p1%da, dl=\eE%p1%dd,
  smso=\eEi, rmso=\eEn,
  smcup=\eE1664P, rmcup=\eEt\eEp,
.TE
.Rs	\" restore baseline stuff
.LP
\*M permits the client program to restrict the terminal emulator
to an arbitrary subrectangle within the window,
called a
.I "text region" .
For example, a text editor wishing to provide scroll bars or banner lines
can still let \*M do the terminal emulation by specifying a text
region that excludes the top and sides of the window.
This text region may be redefined or moved around at will, permitting
multiple terminal sub regions in the same window.
.LP
.B Graphics
.br
In addition to terminal emulation, \*M provides a suite of pen plotter style
graphics primitives.
A client program may draw lines, circles, ellipses, and elliptical arcs
on a window.
The graphics objects may either be completely positioned, or located 
relative to an internal
.I "graphics point" ,
maintained by \*M.
The objects may also be drawn into undisplayed or
.I scratchpad
areas, then copied to the window as a single unit.
The
.I "graphics point"
may be aligned with the character cursor,
for locating graphic objects relative to character text.
Conversely, the character cursor may be aligned with the graphics cursor, 
permitting character text to be placed at arbitrary positions on the window.
.LP
.B Bit-blts
.br
\*M provides a complete set of functions for dealing with bitmaps, or
rectangular arrays of pixels.
Bitmaps may be combined with any of the 16 possible
.I bit-blt
operations.
Non-displayed
bitmaps of arbitrary size may be created and destroyed, and
.I bit-blts
may be performed on the window, within a scratch-pad bitmap,
between two scratch-pad  bitmaps,
or between a scratch-pad bitmap and the window.
Bitmap images may be down-loaded from client programs to \*M, 
or up-loaded from \*M to the client program.
In addition, bitmaps may be saved in files by \*M, or loaded 
into \*M from files.
These last two capabilities permit client programs to manipulate large
amounts of bitmap data without the need to send the bits
over the communication channel.
.LP
.B "Window Positioning"
.br
Either the user or client program may move the 
.I active
window
around on the display.
Windows may be moved with their size retained, reshaped but remain at the
same location, or be both moved and shaped anywhere on the display.
If the window is the 
.I active
window,
it may be
.I buried
(shoved to the back on the display).
If the window is not the
.I active
window,
it can become the active window and then moved about on the display.
.LP
.B "Font Changes"
.br
Client programs may change character fonts at any time, even on a
character by character basis.
\*M comes with scores of different fonts, 
ranging in size from microscopic to viewgraph size.
Client programs are
free to create and down-load their own fonts.
The fonts supplied by \*M are constant width, that is
.I i 's
take up the same amount of room as
.I m 's
do.  There are commands to aid client programs that wish to use 
proportional fonts.
.LP
.B "State Inquiry"
.br
A client program may ask \*M about the state of its current window,
such as its size and position on the display,
the name and size of the current font,
the position and extent of the text region, and the state of
various mode settings.
The client may also inquire about the state of the window system as a whole.
That includes the position and state of the mouse, the number and sizes
of the available fonts, and
the organization of windows on the display.
The display organization may include the position, size, name,
ownership, and spatial ordering for all windows on the display.
.LP
.B "Saved Contexts"
.br
Certain parts of the current window environment may be pushed on a stack,
then restored at some later time.
Client programs rarely need to know the context in which they are called.
They simply push those aspects of the environment they will change, then
restore them before exiting.
About a dozen different parts of the window environment, such as menus,
character fonts, window position, etc. may be stacked independently, or in
any combination.
.LP
.B Menus
.br
\*M has built in support for pop-up menus.
Clients may arrange for menus to pop-up in response to mouse button
hits.
Up to 50 menus may be down-loaded at once for each window.
The client
.I selects
which menu will pop-up when a mouse button is pushed.
When an item of a pop-up menu is chosen, \*M returns the string
previously put into the menu by the client program.
The client program may arrange
for different menus to pop up depending upon the
current mouse position.
Menus may also be linked together as a pop-up menu tree.
Sliding off to the right of a menu (called a
.I parent
menu) while an item is selected
can cause another menu (called a
.I child
menu)
to pop up.
Any item of the
.I parent
menu may be specified as the entry item for a child menu.
Upon selecting an item of a
.I child
menu,
the client program may arrange for \*M to return
ether the action string associated with just the
.I child
menu item,
or the action strings for the selected items of all the menus.
Similar to 
.I sliding
menus,
\*M supports 
.I paging
menus as well.
Long menus may be broken into several pages by the client program.
\*M manages the paging automatically, popping up the next page as
the user slides off the bottom of a paged menu.
.LP
.B Events
.br
Client programs may arrange to be informed by \*M when some change,
called an event,
happens to the state of the window system.
As with menus, the message informing the client program of a change
is formated as specified by the client program.
Examples of events include mouse buttons being depressed or released,
windows changing shape or moving, and the window becoming the
.I active
window or being covered by another window.
Window state information, such as the current cursor position,
may be returned as part of an event string.
.LP
.B "Sweep Functions"
.br
It is often convenient for client programs to
.I sweep ,
or
.I rubber-band
simple objects, such as lines or boxes, in response to moving the mouse.
\*M provides client programs with a mouse activated sweep function.
\*M tracks an edge of the line or box with the mouse and reports 
the coordinates to the client at the conclusion of the sweep
operation, when the user releases the mouse.
As usual, the client program specifies the format of the data returned by
\*M.
.LP
.B "Multiple Window Manipulation"
.br
A single client program may create and manipulate additional windows, called
.I alternate
windows.
The data destined for, or to be received from, an
.I alternate 
window is multiplexed on the same channel as the main window.
The client program selects a window to receive output, and all output
goes to the selected window until a different window is selected.
For input, the client program uses the
.I event
mechanism to determine from which window input arrived.
Alternate windows have the same capabilities as the main window.
There is currently no limit to the number of alternate windows a
client program may have.
Up to 100 windows may exist on the display at one time
before performance begins to degrade seriously.
.LP
.B "Cut and Paste"
.br
\*M provides a globally accessible 
.I snarf
buffer shared among all client programs.
Any client program
may put data into or read data from this buffer.
\*M provides a user initiated 
.I cut
and
.I paste
function from the command menu.
\*M extracts character text from the window and places its
\s-2ASCII\s+2
representation into the 
.I snarf 
buffer.
.I Paste
copies the contents of the
.I snarf 
buffer to the input stream of the active
window.
Client programs, by manipulating the data in the 
.I snarf
buffer,
can interact with the system
.I cut
and
.I paste
functions.
.LP
.B Messages
.br
Although the 
.I snarf
buffer gives client programs a simple asynchronous interprocess
communication mechanism, \*M has a more general synchronous interprocess
message passing scheme.
A client program may send a message
to another client program, or broadcast the message to all client programs.
As a message recipient, the client program may elect to receive messages
as an
.I event
and encapsulate the message and sender name in the format of its choice.
\*M provides the primitives needed to implement 
.I server
clients
by permitting 
.I servers
to register their names, services and protocols with \*M.
Client
programs may query \*M for a list of active
.I servers .
.I Server
messages may be associated with windows by the
.I server
client programs in such a way that the message is automatically
received by a client
program as part of a 
.I "mouse button"
event whenever the mouse button is 
pressed on the
.I server 's
window.
Using this mechanism, client programs can interact with
.I server
clients without any advance knowledge of which 
.I server s
are available or what services they are providing.
.br
.LP
.B "Window Modes"
.br
Client programs may select various combinations of window modes.
These modes tailor the behavior of the macros described above.
Examples of window modes include
.I "auto line wrap"
and
.I "character overstrike"
that affect the terminal emulation,
different coordinate system settings that affect
.I graphics
commands, or
flags that set a window to
.I activate 
automatically upon receiving input, 
ignore all keyboard input, 
or suspend output while a window is obscured.
.Sh nopage Underlying Protocol
The purpose of this library package is both to provide a function call
interface to the stream protocol, and to document each command understood
by \*M.
There are two types of \*M commands, as summarized in the table below.
.TS
center box;
c
l.
\*M command protocol
_
T{
.B ESC
.Sb X 1 ,
.Sb X 2 , ... ,
.Sb X n
.B command
T}
T{
.B ESC
.Sb X 1 ,
.Sb X 2 , ... ,
.Sb X n
.I length
.B command
.I data
T}
.sp 0.5v
.TE
In both cases, 
.SM
.B ESC
.LG
is the
.SM
ASCII
.LG
escape character or '\e033',
whereas the word
.B command
represents a single character command identifier.
The 
.I X 's
are optional integers,  there can be as few as zero, as in the command
.TS
center box;
c.
\fBESC\fP\fIa\fP
.TE
which inserts a blank line in the window, or
as many as eight, as would be used by the command
.TS
center box;
c.
\fBESC\fP0,0,50,100,10,20,3,2\fIb\fP
.TE
which is an example of a command to copy images between bitmaps.
No spaces may be included between the
.B ESC
character and the command identifier character, but the argument
separators may be either commas (,) or semicolons (;).
.LP
The function of the command is determined both
by the command identifier character
and
.I n ,
the number of numeric arguments preceding the command identifier character.
All of the commands with the same command identifier character are closely
related in function.
For example, all the commands
in the following table have the same command character,
.B 'o' ,
and all draw ellipses, but have different effects based upon the
number of arguments.
.TS
center box;
c s
l|l.
Commands that draw \fIellipses\fP
_
1	\fBESC\fP100,200\fBo\fP
2	\fBESC\fP100,200,300,400\fBo\fP
3	\fBESC\fP100,200,300,400,2\fBo\fP
.TE
All of the ellipses have major and minor axis lengths of 
.I 100
and
.I 200 
units respectively.
Command 1 draws the ellipse at the current graphics location.
Command 2 draws the ellipse at the location specified by the
third and forth arguments, at
.Fr "" 300 400
\&.
Command 3 draws the ellipse into scratchpad bitmap number
.I 2 .
.LP
The second form of \*M commands,
which is a special case of the first form,
is used for downloading data from the
client program to \*M.
The integer
.I length
specifies the number of bytes of data to be downloaded, and
.I data
are the
.I length
number of data values downloaded.
An example of the second type of \*M command is
.TS
center box;
c.
\fBESC\fP11,7\fBb\fP\fII-moved\fP
.TE
which instructs \*M to send the client program the string
.I "I-moved"
any time the client's window is moved to a different location
on the display.
The
.I 11
refers to the number of the
.I move
event and the
.I 7
is the number of characters in the event string, which in this case is
.I "I-moved" .
.LP
All of the command identifier characters are listed in
.I "window.h" .
The command actions, determined by the command identifier and number
of command arguments, are described by the macros in this document.
.Sh page Conventions and Notation
All functions and macros and programming examples are shown
.ft \*(Ff
in a typewriter font
.ft
to distinguish them from ordinary text.
Similarly, function and macro arguments are shown in a 
.ft \*(Fn
bold typewriter font.
.ft
.LP
The names of often used
arguments passed to macros indicate their function,
and are defined below.
.Ad column , row
The integers
.Fa column
and
.Fa row
refer to a character position in
.I character
coordinates even though characters may be placed at arbitrary pixel
locations within a window
and need not fall on
.Fa column
or
.Fa row
boundaries.
.Ad Dwidth , Dheight
The integers
.Fa Dwidth
and
.Fa Dheight
represent a width and height in
.B display
coordinates.
.Ad mode
The positive integer
.Fa mode ,
represents the bit combination 
of window modes.
.Fa Mode
is usually an
.I or ed
list of constants in
.I term.h .
A typical use of
.Fa mode
is the argument to 
.Fr m_push mode
 as in
.Fr m_push "P_FLAGS \(br P_EVENT \(br P_MENU"
\&.
.Ad n
The small non-negative integer
.Fi n
represents a resource descriptor
when describing objects such as windows, fonts, or menus.
.Ad name
.Fa Name
is the file name of a bitmap image on the 
.I \*M-host
machine.
File names given with no directory prefix are referenced relative to
the
.I icon
subdirectory of
\*M's 
home directory.
The home directory is installation dependent, and may be determined with
the command
.I "\*M -V" .
.Ad parent , child
The small positive integers
.Fa parent
and
.Fa child
represent menus.
A
.I child
menu is linked
to a
.I parent 
menu forming a tree of menus.
.Ad radius
The positive integer
.Fa radius
along with
.Fa radius1
and 
.Fa radius2
signifies a radius when referring to circles or 
major and minor axis when referring to ellipses.
They are only referenced in respect to
.I window
coordinates.
.Ad string
An array of characters,
.Fi string
is a null terminated
.SM
ASCII
.LG
character string.
Except where noted, several
.SM
ASCII
.LG
control characters can be included in
strings by escaping them with \e\fIX\fP, where
.I X
is one of the  characters shown in the following table.
.TS
center box;
c s s
c | c | c
c | c | c
r | l | l.
Character string control characters
_
escape	octal	Meaning
character	value	
=
\eb	010	Back space
\eE	033	Escape
\ee	033	Escape
\ef	014	Form feed
\eg	007	Bell
\eM	*	Turn on 
		8'th (parity) bit
\en	012	New line
\er	015	Return
\es	040	Space
\e\e	134	Back-slash (\e)

.TE
.ce
* \s-2(the next character has its 8'th bit turned on)\s+2
.Ad to , from
The small positive integers
.Fa to
and
.Fa from
identify the destination and source bitmaps for
.I bit-blt
operations.
The value 0 (zero) represents the current window bitmap;
positive integers name scratch-pad bitmap storage.
.Ad width , height
The integers
.Fa width
and
.Fa height
represent a width and height in
.B window
coordinates.
.Ad X , Y
The integer pair
.Fr "" X Y
 represents a point in 
.I display
coordinates.
The suffixes
.Fi src
and
.Fi dst
as in
.Fr "" X_src Y_src
 or
.Fr "" X_dst Y_dst
 are used to indicate 
.I source
and 
.I destination
coordinates respectively.
Similarly, the suffixes
.Fi 1
and
.Fi 2
as in
.Fr "" X1 Y1
 refer generically to the first or second coordinate.
.Ad  x , y
The integers
.Fr "" x y
 represent a point in
.I window
coordinates.  Whether that is
.I relative
(i.e. 0-999) or
.I absolute
depends upon the current coordinate setting of the window.
As with
.Fr "" X Y
 above, the modifiers
.Fi src , dst , 1 ,
and
.Fi 2
refer respectively to the
.I source ,
.I destination ,
.I first ,
and
.I second
coordinates.
