'\"                        Copyright (c) 1988 Bellcore
'\"                            All Rights Reserved
'\"       Permission is granted to copy or use this program, EXCEPT that it
'\"       may not be sold for profit, the copyright notice must be reproduced
'\"       on copies, and credit should be given to Bellcore where it is due.
'\"       BELLCORE MAKES NO WARRANTY AND ACCEPTS NO LIABILITY FOR THIS PROGRAM.
'\"
'\"	$Header: doc.6,v 4.1 88/06/29 17:05:09 bianchi Exp $
'\"	$Source: /tmp/mgrsrc/doc/usrman/RCS/doc.6,v $
.Sh page Using the Library
Clients using 
.I
The C Interface Library
.R
should specify:
.DS
.ft \*(Ff
#include "term.h"
.ft R
.DE
which also includes 
.DS
.ft \*(Ff
<stdio.h>
.ft R
.DE
if it has not already been included.
Programs are compiled either with
.DS
.ft \*(Ff
cc -o foo -I$(inc) foo.c libmgr.a
.ft R
.DE
where $(inc) is the \*M include directory
or simply
.DS
.ft \*(Ff
cc -o foo foo.c -lmgr
.ft R
.DE
if the library is installed in a standard location.
The file
.I libmgr.a
contains the functions listed in the last section.
Several compile time options are available to the client program using
the library.
Normally, the library setup routine,
.Fr m_setup
attempts to open
.I /dev/tty
to communicate with \*M.
Client programs may define the C preprocessor symbols
.SM
.I M_DEVICEIN
.LG
or
.SM
.I M_DEVICEOUT
.LG
to override the selection of
.I /dev/tty
for input or output respectively.
After each macro call,
the flush flag
.SM
.I M_FLUSH
.LG
is tested to see if output should be flushed to \*M.
If the C preprocessor symbol
.SM
.I M_NOFLUSH
.LG
is defined, before the client program includes
.I term.h ,
The flush flag is never tested, and it becomes the responsibility of the
client program to insure output is flushed at the appropriate times.
.LP
Several external variables maintained by the library are accessible to
client programs.
The
.I stdio
.SM
.I FILE
.LG
pointers
.I m_termin
and
.I m_termout
are used for directing output to, and receiving input from \*M.
These file pointers are initialized in
.Fr m_setup
\&, and may be changed by client programs after
.Fr m_setup
 is called.
The integer
.I m_flags
contains the current library mode settings, as returned by
.Fr m_setup
\&.
The 
.SM
.I M_MODEOK
.LG
and
.SM
.I M_FLUSH
.LG
bits of 
.I m_flags
may also be changed at any time after 
.Fr m_setup 
 is called.
The integer
.I m_envcount
contains the current window context depth, and is used by
.Fr m_popall
to pop the appropriate number of contexts.
.I M_envcount
should not be changed by client programs.
Finally, the character
.I m_menuchar
defines the menu separator character used by
.Fr menu_load
\&.
This character, set to '\e005' by the library package,
can be changed to any character that will not appear as part of
a menu item or action.
.Sh page Glossary
.IP "\fBabsolute coordinates\fP" 0.5i
.br
.I "Absolute coordinates"
is a coordinate system used in
.I windows
measured in units of pixels.
.IP "\fBactive window\fP" 0.5i
.br
The
.I active
window is the window logically in the front of the display, which is
receiving keyboard and mouse input.
.IP "\fBalternate window\fP" 0.5i
.br
An
.I "alternate window"
is an additional window created by a client program that shares the
communication channel with the main window.
.IP \fBbitmap\fP 0.5i
.br
A
.I bitmap
is a rectangular array of bits, or pixels if the bitmap is
currently on the display.
.IP \fBchannel\fP 0.5i
.br
The
.I channel
is the bidirectional byte stream connecting \*M with
the client program.
The 
.I channel
is usually the program's standard input and output.
.IP "\fBcharacter coordinates\fP" 0.5i
.br
.I "Character coordinates"
is the 
coordinate system used in windows for counting characters in
.I columns
and
.I rows .
.IP "\fBcharacter cursor\fP" 0.5i
.br
The
.I "character cursor"
is the location in the window where the next character will be placed.
The cursor location is always highlighted on the active window.
.IP "\fBchild menu\fP" 0.5i
.br
A
.I "child menu"
is the
menu that will pop up when the user slides off to the right
of a popped up 
.I "parent menu" .
.IP "\fBclient program\fP" 0.5i
.br
A
.I "client program"
is any Unix command that is running in an \*M window.
Client programs may be existing programs, as might be found in
.I /bin
or new applications written specifically to take advantage of the
windowing environment.
.IP \fBclient-host\fP 0.5i
.br
The
.I "client-host"
is the computer that the client program is running on.
It is often the same as the
.I \*M-host
machine, but it does not need to be.
.IP "\fBdisplay coordinates\fP" 0.5i
.I "Display coordinates"
is a coordinate system used to measure pixels on the display.
The top left corner of the display is at (0,0), with
.I x
increasing to the right, and
.I y
increasing down.
.br
.IP \fBexposed\fP 0.5i
.br
A window is
.I exposed
if it is entirely visible.
.IP "\fBgraphics point\fP" 0.5i
.br
The
.I "graphics point"
is a location on the window, measured in the prevailing window
coordinate system, that may serve as a reference location 
or origin for many of the graphics operations.
.IP \fBlistener\fP 0.5i
.br
A 
.I listener
is a window that has turned on the
.SM
.Fi ACCEPT
.LG
event and is willing to receive messages from other client programs.
.IP "\fBmain window\fP" 0.5i
.br
A client program's
.I "main window"
is the window the program was started in.
The client program may create and destroy alternate windows,
but not its
.I "main window" .
If the user destroys a client program's
.I " main window" ,
the connection
to \*M is severed, and the client program receives a
.I hangup
signal.
.IP \fB\*M-host\fP 0.5i
.br
The
\*M-host is the computer that \*M is running on. 
.IP "\fBmouse cursor\fP" 0.5i
.br
The
.I "mouse cursor"
is a small bitmap or
.I icon
that tracks the movement of the mouse on the display.
Normally the
.I "mouse cursor"
is a small arrow pointing north west.
.IP \fBobscured\fP 0.5i
.br
A window is
.I obscured
when it is partially or totally covered by another
window.
.IP "\fBparent menu\fP" 0.5i
.br
A  menu is called a
.I "parent menu"
when sliding off to the right of a selected item causes
another menu or
.I "child menu"
to pop up.
.IP "\fBrelative coordinates\fP" 0.5i
.br
.I "Relative coordinates"
is a coordinate system for windows where a single unit represents one
thousandth of the way across (or down) the window.
.IP "\fBscratchpad bitmap\fP" 0.5i
.br
A 
.I "scratchpad bitmap"
is a chunk of memory, allocated by \*M for use by a client program,
that may hold a bitmap image that is not on the display.
.IP "\fBsnarf buffer\fP" 0.5i
.br
The
.I "snarf buffer"
is a buffer maintained by \*M of arbitrary size that is accessible by all
client programs.
.IP "\fBtarget window\fP" 0.5i
.br
A
.I "target window"
is a window that is to receive a message from another window.
.IP "\fBtext region\fP" 0.5i
.br
A 
.I "text region"
is the part of the window in which character text and the 
functions that operate on characters work.
The
.I "text region"
may be the entire window (the default)
or a rectangular subregion within the window.
.IP "\fBwindow border\fP" 0.5i
.br
The
.I "window border"
is a thin black border around every window that separates the
window from the rest of the display.
.IP "\fBwindow context\fP" 0.5i
.br
A
.I "window context"
contains the values for one or more aspects of the window's
state.
.I "Window context"
a may be saved on a stack, and then restored at some later time.
.IP "\fBwindow id\fP" 0.5i
.br
A
.I "window id"
is a unique number assigned to every window that may be used
as an identifier when sending a message to the window.
.I "Window id" s
have two parts,
the first part is the process number of the client program that
was started when the window was created,
the second part is the windows
.I alternate
window number, or
zero for a main window.
.Sh page Sample Client Program
.LP
This program, called
.I close ,
closes, or iconifies a window.  
Its not a terribly useful application in its own right, but it does
exercise several of the library calls.
When 
.I close
starts up, it makes the window smaller,
moves it toward the top of the display,
then writes the word "closed" in it.
If the window is covered by another window,
it changes the word "closed" to "hidden", then flashes its window every
15 seconds as long as the window is covered.
If the window is then uncovered, the word "hidden" gets changed back
to "closed".
Activating the window causes
.I close
to restore the window's original shape and contents, then exit.
.LP
.SS
/* iconify a MGR window */

#include <signal.h>
#include "term.h"

#define TIME    15                /* time interval for reminder */
#define CONTEXT P_POSITION | P_WINDOW | P_FLAGS | P_EVENT | P_CURSOR

static char line[80];             /* event input buffer */

int main()
    {
    int clean(), timer();         /* interrupt routines */
    int x,y;                      /* window position on display */
    char *msg = "closed";         /* closed window "icon" */

    /* setup the window environment */

    m_setup(M_FLUSH);             /* setup i/o, turn on flushing */
    m_push(CONTEXT);              /* save current window context */
    m_setmode(M_NOWRAP);          /* don't auto-wrap at right margin */
    m_ttyset();                   /* set up tty modes */

    /* catch the appropriate signals */

    signal(SIGTERM,clean);        /* in case we get terminated */
    signal(SIGALRM,timer);        /* for the reminder service */

    /* iconify the window */

    get_size(&x,&y,0,0);          /* fetch window coordinates */
    m_sizeall(x,10,strlen(msg),1);/* move and resize window */
    m_clear();                    /* clear the window */
    m_printstr(msg);              /* print message in the window */

    /* catch events */

    m_setevent(ACTIVATE, "A\er"); /* window is now the active window */
    m_setevent(COVERED,  "C\er"); /* covered by another window */
    m_setevent(UNCOVERED,"U\er"); /* completely visible */
    m_setevent(REDRAW,   "R\er"); /* redraw requested */

    m_clearmode(M_ACTIVATE);      /* bury the window */

    /* wait for an event */

    while(m_gets(line) != NULL)   /* read a line from MGR */
        switch (*line) {
        case 'A':                 /* window is activated */
            clean();              /* clean up and exit */
            break;
        case 'C':                 /* window is covered */
            m_clear();
            m_printstr("hidden");
            alarm(TIME);          /* turn on reminder */
            break;
        case 'R':                 /* system 'redraw' */
        case 'U':                 /* window is uncovered */
            m_clear();
            m_printstr(msg);
            alarm(0);             /* turn off reminder */
            break;
        case 'T':                 /* send reminder */
            m_setmode(M_WOB);     /* highlight window */
            m_bell();             /* ring the bell */
            sleep(1);
            alarm(TIME);          /* reset reminder timer */
            m_clearmode(M_WOB);   /* reset window highlighting */
            break;
        }
    }

clean()                           /* clean up and exit */
    {
    m_ttyreset();                 /* reset tty modes */
    m_popall();                   /* restore window context */
    exit(0);
    }

timer()                           /* called at reminder timeout */
    {
    m_sendme("T\er");             /* send timeout message */
    }
.SE
.Sh page Macros and Functions by Category
.LP
.FS *
The routines marked with a dagger (\(dg) are functions,
the other routines are macros.  The page number on which the macro or
function is defined is printed in bold face after the name.
.FE
